1705 CINNA

*This cross-examination of the elderly slave Cinna (his place of origin
is not recorded) took place in Stellenbosch. It provides a brief glimpse
into the way in which owners treated one of their slaves who had lived
beyond his most productive labouring years. Cinna ran away to his sister
in Cape Town (we do not know if she was a free woman or not), a telling
insight into slave family lives and the connections between slaves
separated by circumstances and location. He then briefly worked for
another burgher, Hans Hendrik Hatting, who seems to have treated him
better and wanted to buy him. Hendrik’s need for Cinna, despite his age,
suggests a shortage of readily available labourers in this period. *

*As so often in the judicial records, this is a fragmentary glimpse of a
telling episode. The case was not sent to the Council of Justice and we
do not know whether Hendrik got his wish or what happened to Cinna. No
other records of this case survive, so we do not know if Cinna was
punished for his actions.*^*[^1]*^* *

**1/STB 3/8** Criminele Verklaringen, 1702-1749, unpaginated.

Op Saturdag, den 29^e^ Augustus *anno* 1705.

Examen gedaan door den edele landdrost Johannes Starrenburg ten
overstaan van den heemraaden Guilliam du Toit en Ferdinandus Appel
wegens de slaav van den landbouwer Arij van Wijk, genaamt Cinna, dewelke
’t naar volgende belijd:

Sijn naam?

Cinna.

Ouderdom?

Weet het niet (maar heeft grijse haaren).

Wiens slaav?

Arij van Wijk.

Hoe lang bij sijn meester gewoond?

’t Sederd de dood van de ouders van Arije van Wijk.

Of hij buijten kennis van zijn meester weg gelopen is?

Buijten consent ofte sonder vragen.

Om wat redenen?

Omdat geen klederen nog tabak kreeg, en van de vrouw en kinderen gedurig
gescholden wierd voor den ouden hond, en verders geplaagt.

Wanneer op wat tijd?

Den jongstledene Sondag, den 23 Augustus 1705.

Waar hij na toe wilde?

Dat hij een dag na de Caab is geweest na zijn suster om een broekje en
wat tabak te krijgen.

Wanneer bij Hans Hendk. Hatting gecomen is in de Tijgers vallij?

In ’t weder comen van de Caab.

Hoe lang zig daar opgehouden heeft?

Vier dagen.

Of Hans Hendk. hem heeft laten binden?

Hij andwoord neen.

Wat werk daar gedaan heeft?

Niet anders als een dag in de tuijn gespit.

Wat de andre dagen gedaan heeft?

Niet met al.

Wat Hans Hendk. tegen hem heeft gesegt?

> Dat hij na zijn baas wou gaan om hem van de baas te kopen.

Aldus g’examineert ten overstaan van voorseijde heemraden op ’t
regthuijs Stellenbosch alwaar dese is getekent, *dato ut supra*.

\[get.\] Guilliam du Toit, Ferdinandus Appel.

Mij present, \[get.\] Jan Mahieu, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

On Saturday, 29 August in the year 1705.

Examination done by the honourable landdrost Johannes Starrenburg, in
the presence of the *heemraden* Guilliam du Toit and Ferdinandus Appel,
of the slave of the farmer Arij van Wijk, named Cinna, who confesses as
follows:

His name?

Cinna.

Age?

Does not know (but has grey hair).

Whose slave?

Arij van Wijk.

How long he lived with his master?

Since the death of the parents of Arij van Wijk.

If he had run away without the knowledge of his master?

Without consent or without asking.

For what reasons?

Because of getting no clothes, nor tobacco, and continually being abused
as an old dog by the wife and children, and further being tormented.

When, at what time?

This last Sunday, 23 August 1705.^[^2]^

Where he wanted to go to?

That for one day he had been to the Cape to his sister to get trousers
and some tobacco.

When did he come to Hans Hendrik Hatting in Tijgers Valleij?

On returning from the Cape.

How long he remained there?

Four days.

If Hans Hendrik had him tied up?

He answers no.

What work he did there?

Nothing but digging in the garden for a day.

What he did on the other days?

Nothing at all.

What Hans Hendrik said to him?

That he wanted to go to his *baas* to buy him from the *baas*.

Thus examined, in the presence of the aforesaid *heemraden* at the
Stellenbosch judiciary where this was signed, the date as above.

\[signed\] Guilliam du Toit, Ferdinandus Appel.

In my presence, \[signed\] Jan Mahieu, secretary.

[^1]:  *The case was not considered serious enough to send to the
    Council of Justice (there is no mention of it in the *regtsrollen*,
    CJ 4, or Documents in Criminal Cases, CJ 308), and so was presumably
    dealt with by the landdrost in Stellenbosch. This testimony is a
    single fragment which survived by chance in the Stellenbosch
    archive, bound in the front of a volume of other testimonies from
    the 1740s. *

[^2]:  It might be significant that Cinna ran away on a Sunday, when
    slaves were at least theoretically supposed to have a free day,
    although most farmers ignored the fact (Kolb 1777, vol. II: 306 and
    309; Mentzel 1925: 124; Biewenga 1999: 203-4, 206; De Kock 1950:
    61). For other examples in this volume, see 1719 Jonas van Manado;
    1761 Johan Spring in ’t Veld; and 1775 Jephta van Madagascar.
