1.  ANTHONIJ VAN GOA

*This case reveals the problems that slaves faced in forming permanent
emotional and sexual relationships when they could be separated by sale
at any time.[^1] Anthonij’s attempts to get back to the farm from
which he had been sold were caused by his separation from Jannetie, the
slave whom he refers to as his ‘wife’, although VOC law did not
recognise the right of slaves to marry.[^2] His discovery that she
had taken another partner after his permanent and forced departure led
to his attack on her and his subsequent attempted suicide – whether from
despair at her infidelity, or from fear of punishment for his attack, is
unclear. *

*It is noteworthy that the court imposed a milder sentence than the
death penalty recommended in the *eijsch*,[^3] presumably having
some sympathy for Anthonij’s predicament. Nonetheless, he was still
whipped, branded, forced to work in chains and returned to his new
owner. Given his attempted suicide, it is questionable which fate he
might have preferred. Of Jannetjie we know no more. *

*Both the *sententie* and the interrogation of Anthonij van Goa are
included in this case. Although there is much repetition, each document
has its own character and insights. From the *sententie* we learn more
details of the case as a whole, while the answers Anthonij gives to the
questions of the court bring us closer to his own voice and motivations.
It is a rare example of a slave’s direct testimony, albeit mediated
through the scribe of the court.*

**CJ 784** Sententiën, 1717-1725, ff. 164-69.

Alsoo Anthoni \[*sic*\] van Goa, oud naar gissing dertig jaren,
lijfeijgen van de burgeresse Beatrix Verweij,[^4] althans ’s heeren
gevangen, buijten pijn of dwang van banden, van ijsers, ofte eenige de
minste bedrijging van dien, vrijwillig heeft geconfesseert, en den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements evident en ten vollen
gebleeken is:

Hoe dat hij gevangen door den burger Jan Oberholster op desselfs
publicque vendutie aan de voormelde Beatrix Verweij verkogt zijnde, en
aldaar den tijt van omtrend twee maanden zijn dienst gepresteert
hebbende, van gezegde zijne lijfvrouw (soo voorgeeft) een permissie
briefje heeft verkreegen om zijn goed, hetwelke onder de slaven van den
landbouwer Jan Jurgen Roos berustende waaren, vandaar te haalen, alsdoen
mede neemende een combaars.

Dat hij gevangen sig vervolgens van daar na zijn geweesene meesters post
heeft begeeven, aldaar een nagt geslapen, voorts zig vervoegt op de
plaats van den landbouwer Abraham Cloete, beijde omtrent Stellenbosch
geleegen, alwaar insgelijx een nagt geslapen heeft en door de slaven
aldaar van cost besorgt geweest zijnde, den derden dag naar dat van zijn
meesteres was afgegaan, door de knegt van dezelve, van dese laaste post
is afgehaalt, na de voornoemde zijne meesteresses plaats gebragt, aldaar
over dit agterblijven gecorrigeert wesende, den gevangen sig egter niet
heeft ontsien nogte geschroomt, agt dagen naar dato van genoemde zijne
meesteresse weg te loopen, en hem te begeeven naar de plaats van zijn
geweesene meester, Jan Oberholster, meergemeld, alwaar hij sig daags
daaraan in een cloof van ’t gebergte daar omtrent en des nagts bij de
lijfeijgenen van dikwijls gemelde Oberholster, die hem van spijs bezorgt
hebben, heeft opgehouden, sonder dat Oberholster, die Caabwaarts was
gereeden, nogte desselfs huijsvrouw van dit gedoente eenige kennisse
hebben gehad.

Dat de slavin van voornoemde Oberholster, Jannetie genaamt, en daar ten
huijse wesende, zijn gevangens bijzit (soo voorgeeft), wanneer hij als
slaaf mede aldaar woonagtig was, zoude zijn geweest, en hem geswooren
hebben dat, soo lang hij gevangen leefde, zij geen ander man soude
neemen, dog dat hij ontwaart hebbende dat zij Jannetie bij een andere
jonge lag, dezelve van haar heeft weggestooten ende voornoemde slavin
Jannetie met een mes, hem in judicio vertoont, een wonde, omtrent drie
vinger breed boven de navel in de buijk onder de maag, inwendig vijf
vinger breed diep penetreerende, en uijtwendig drie vinger breed lang,
heeft toegebragt dat ook het net wel een vierendeel uijt de wonde
gehangen heeft, mitsgaders dat het binnenste vlies van ’t panniculum
door gestooken was, confesseerende sulx gedaan te hebben met intentie
haar om ’t leeven te brengen.

Dat hij gevangen, na dese enorme quetzing geperpetreert te hebben, sig
met hetselve mes in de daar omstreeks staande ruijgte heeft begeeven, en
wanneer er volk quam om hem gevangen te neemen, hij sig selfs met dat
mes ook gequest heeft met voorneemen sig ook van ’t leeven te berooven
om alsoo de openbaare punitie over dese gruweldaad te ontgaan. Dat hij
gevangen vervolgens het mes van sig weggeworpen hebbende, door de
landbouwers Jan en Claas Louw, mitsgaders Jacob Cloete en Jan van
Ellewe, gevat en, eindelijk, door voornoemde Cloete en Jan Louw in
handen van de justitie overgeleevert.

Alle ’twelke zijnde zaaken van seer groote en pernitieuse gevolgen, die
in een land daar de justitie wert geoeffent, geensints mogen gedult,
maar ten spiegel en afschrik van alsulke boosaardige creatuuren moeten
geweert, en seveerlijk gepunieert werden.

Soo is ’t dat den agtbaren Raad van Justitie, opgemelt, ten dage
dienende, gezien ende geresumeert hebbende, den schrijftelijken
crimineelen eijsch en conclusie bij den edele landdrost Jacob Voet
*nomine officii* teegens den gevangen gedaan ende genoomen, mitgaders
gelet op des gevangens eijge libre confessie, in judicio behoorlijk
gerecolleert, en tot justificatie van zijnen eijsch daar neevens
geproduceert, verder gepondereert alle ’tgeene ter materie eenigsints
dienende was en haar edelen Agtbaren deede moveren, doende regt in den
naam ende van weegen de hoogmogende Heere Staaten Generaal der vrije
Vereenigde Neederlanden, den gevangen hebben gecondemneert, gelijk hem
condemneeren bij deeze: omme gebragt te werden ter plaatse daar men
alhier gewoon is crimineelen sententie \[*sic*\] te executeeren, en
aldaar den scherpregter overgeleevert zijnde, met de strop om de hals
onder de galg te pronk gesteld, vervolgens aan een paal gebonden, met
roeden op de bloote rugge strengelijk gegeesselt en daarop gebrandmerkt
te werden, wijders voor den tijt van twee jaaren in de ketting geklonken
zijnde, zijn meesteresse thuijs gezonden te werden, mits deselve
betalende de costen en mise van justitie.

Aldus gedaan en gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 27^e^
Maart 1721.

Gepronuntieert en geëxecuteert den 29^e^ daar aan volgende.

\[get.\] M.P. Chavonnes, K.J. Slotsboo, Jan de la Fontaine, A. v.
Kervel, Jn. Aldersz, C. Valk, Ns. Heijning, J.T. Rhenius, V. Kleinveld,
Fk. Russouw, M. Bergstedt.

Mij present, \[get.\] Dl. Thibault, secretaris.

**CJ 325** Criminele Process Stukken, 1721, ff. 57-64.

Vraagpointen \[*sic*\], omme daerop, ter requisitie van den landdrost
Jacob Voet, gehoort en g’examineert te worden, den slaav Anthonij van
Goa, toebehoorende de burgeresse Beatrix Verweij.

Compareerde voor de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde leeden uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deses \[*sic*\] gouvernements, den slaaf
Anthoni, hier neevens genaamt, dewelke op de onderstaande vrage sodanig
heeft g’antwoord als ter zijde van een ieder staat aangeteekent.

Articul 1: Des gevangens naem, geboorteplaats en ouderdom.

Antwoord: Anthoni van Goa, oud naar gissing omtrent de dertig jaaren.

Articul 2: Wiens lijfeijgen hij gedaagde alsnu is?

Antwoord: Beatrix Verweij, thans in de Tijgerbergen woonagtig, toe te
behooren.

Articul 3: Hoe lang geleen \[*sic*\] en door wien hij aen deselve
vercogt is?

Antwoord: Dat Oberholster hem op zijn vendutie, als zijn geweese baas
zijnde, aan de voornoemde Beatrix verkogt heeft, sonder den netten tijt
te weeten.

Articul 4: Hoe lange teijt hij gedaagde bij deselve heeft dienst gedaen
voor dat d’ eerste maal van haer is g’aufugeert?

Antwoord: Ik geloof twee weeken, maar ik heb een permissie briefje gehad
om mijn goed te haalen, ’tgeen berustende was onder de slaven van Jan
Jurgen Roos, en van daar ben ik gegaan naar de plaats van Abraham
Cloete, die hij van mij geweesene baas gekogt had.

Articul 5: Wanneer sulx geweest is en wat goederen meede genoomen heeft?

Antwoord: Als op ’t voorgaande beantwoorde, en niets mede genomen te
hebben als een combaars.

Articul 6: Waer alsdoen naer toegegaan is?

Antwoord: Het laast gebleeven te zijn bij Abraham Cloete.

Articul 7: Hoe lange tijd aldaer en elders verbleeven is?

Antwoord: Dat dien avond, wanneer hij van zijn meesteresse post was
afgegaan, eenen nagt heeft geslapen op de post van zijn geweesen
meester, de tweede nagt op de post van Abraham Cloete, voornoemt, ende
dat daags daaraan de knegt van zijn meesteresse hem van daar is komen
haalen.

Articul 8: Wie hem alsdoen van nooddruft voorsien heeft?

Antwoord: Dat hij aan ’t huijs van Oberholster, door de slaven geroepen
weesende, de cost heeft gekreegen, en insgelijken voegen ook bij Cloete.

Articul 9: Waer, mitsgaders door wien hij gevangen alsdoen gevangen is?

Antwoord: Door de knegt van zijn meesteresse, opgemeld, en op gemelde
post van Abraham Cloete.

Articul 10: Ofte hij t’ huijs komende, straf ontfangen heeft?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 11: Wat teijd daeraen van zijn meestresse andermael is
opgedrossen?

Antwoord: Agt dagen naar dato.

Articul 12: Weswaarts sig alsdoen begevende en opgehouden heeft?

Antwoord: Direck naar de post van Oberholster, maar die, nog zijn vrouw,
hebben mij niet gesien, en ik heb mij boven de plaats van Oberholster in
een cloof opgehouden, en des nagts ben ik bij de lijfeijgenen geweest.

Articul 13: Ofte ten dien teijd onder andere niet geweest is op de
plaats van zijn genoemde baas Oberholster, digt aen Stellenbosch en ofte
deselve aldaer doen was?

Antwoord: Ja, maar dat Oberholster aan de Caab was.

Articul 14: Wie hem gevangen van kost versorgt en hoedanig sig aldaer
onthouden heeft?

Antwoord: Door de meijt en jongens verzorgt te zijn geweest en
vervolgens zig onthouden als op articul 12 staat vermelt.

Articul 15: Ofte alsdoen aldaer meede niet een slavin is geweest, (soo
jae) hoe genoemt?

Antwoord: Ja, en is Jannetie genaamt.

Articul 16: Wie die toebehoorde, mitsgaders ofte hij gevangen aen
deselve kennis gehad heeft?

Antwoord: Oberholster, en ’t is mijn eijge vrouw geweest doen ik daar
woonde.

Articul 17: Of hij deselve niet gekwest \[*sic*\] heeft?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 18: Op wat wijse sulx verrigt heeft?

Antwoord: Die mijt heeft gesweerd: Ik sal geen andere man neemen soo
lang als jij leeft, dog wanneer hij gesien heeft dat se bij een andere
lag, doe doen mijn hart seer, doe heb ik de jong \[*sic*\] weggestooten,
en ik heb haar met een mes in de buijk gestooken.

Articul 19: Waerom sulx gedaen heeft?

Antwoord: Omdat zij bij een andere hield.

Articul 20: Ofte het met intentje is geweest haer dood te maken?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 21: Ofte het mes, hem gevangen nu in judicio vertoont, ’tselve
mes is waer meede hij de gruweldaat heeft gepleegt?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 22: Waar en op wat manier hij gevangen ’tselve kwijt geraakt is?

Antwoord: Ik ben er mede naar de ruijgte toegelopen en, doen ’t volk
quam om mijn te vangen, heb ik mijn selfs gequetst en vervolgens ’t mes
weggegooijt.

Articul 23: Hoedanig hij gevangen g’apprehendeert en in handen des
eijschers geraakt is?

Antwoord: Door Jan en Claas Louw, mitsgaders Jacob Cloete en Jan van
Ellewe, vervolgens door Jan Louw en Jacob Cloete aan den eijscher
overgelevert te weesen.

Articul 24: Ofte hij gevangen aen die hem wilde vangen geen tegenstand
gedaen heeft?

Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 25: Op wat manier sulx sig heeft toe gedraegen?

Antwoord: Ik heb niet \[*sic*\] gedaen.

Articul 26: Ofte hij sig selfs aldoen niet gekwest heeft?

Antwoord: Als op articul 22.

Articul 27: Waerom sulx gedaen heeft?

Antwoord: Ik dagt, ik sal mij selfs ook maar dood steeken, om de straf
te ontgaan.

Articul 28: Ofte het met ’tselve mes niet is geweest, daer hij gevangen
de meijt meede gegrieft had?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 29: Ofte hij gevangen niet voorneemens is geweest aldaer te
huijse meerder kwaat te verrigten?

Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 30: Ofte hem gevangen niet bewust is over die misdaat een swaare
straf te verdienen?

Antwoord: Ja.

Aldus gevraagt ende geantwoord aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 7^e^ Maart
1721.

Deese merken XXX zijn door Anthoni van Goa getrek \[*sic*\].

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] Ns. Heijning, M. Bergstedt.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] Dl. Thibault, secretaris.

Recollement

Compareerde voor de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde leeden uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deses gouvernements, den slaaf Anthoni van
Goa, hiernevens genoemt, denwelken de gedaane vraage met de daarop
gegeven antwoorde van woorde tot woorde voorgeleesen zijnde, verklaarde
daarbij volkomen te persisteeren, niet begeerende datter iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal.

Aldus gedaan, ende in de Nederduijtsche taale, die den gevangen
reedelijk verstaat en spreekt, gerecolleert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop,
den 8^e^ Maart 1721.

Deese merken XXX zijn door Anthoni van Goa getrekt.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] Ns. Heijning, M. Bergstedt.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] Dl. Thibault, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Since Anthonij van Goa, 30 years old at a guess, bondsman of the burgher
Beatrix Verweij, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntarily
confessed, without torture or force of bonds, of irons, or even the
least threat of suchlike, and since it has appeared evident and clear to
the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That the prisoner was sold by the burgher Jan Oberholster on his public
auction to the aforementioned Beatrix Verweij and, having rendered his
services there for a period of about two months, obtained (as he
asserts) a permission letter[^5] from his said owner to collect his
things, which were being taken care of by the slaves of the farmer Jan
Jurgen Roos, from there, on which occasion he took along a blanket.

That the prisoner then set out from there to his former master’s post,
sleeping a night at that place, after which he resorted to the farm of
the farmer Abraham Cloete, both situated around Stellenbosch, where he
likewise slept a night, and was provided with food by the slaves at that
place, that on the third day after he had gone from his mistress, he was
fetched by the *knecht* of the same from this last post and brought back
to the aforementioned farm of his mistress, where he was chastised over
this staying away. However, the prisoner neither scrupled nor hesitated
to run away from his mistress eight days after this and to betake
himself to the farm of his former master, the aforementioned Jan
Oberholster, where he stayed, during the following day, in a kloof in
the mountains around there, and at night with the bondsmen of the
aforementioned Oberholster, who also provided him with food, without
Oberholster, who had ridden to the Cape, nor the same’s wife, having any
knowledge of all these doings.

That the woman slave of the aforenamed Oberholster, named Jannetie – who
was the prisoner’s concubine (as he asserts) when he too was living
there as a slave, and who had promised him that she would not take
another man for as long as he was alive – was also there at the house.
When, however, he noticed that she, Jannetie, was lying with another
*jongen*, he pushed him away from her and, with the knife which was
shown him in court, inflicted a wound in the abdomen of the
aforementioned slave, Jannetie, underneath the stomach, about three
fingers above the navel, penetrating internally to a depth of five
fingers and externally three fingers in length, so that the
omentum[^6] hung from the wound a quarter of the way and, moreover,
that the inner membrane of the tissue was perforated;[^7] confessing
to have done this with the intention to take her life.

That the prisoner after having perpetrated this atrocious wounding, went
with the same knife into the nearby thicket and, when people came to
take him prisoner, he also wounded himself with that knife, with the
intention to also rob himself of his life, in order to escape the public
punishment of this monstrous deed in this way. That afterwards the
prisoner, after having thrown the knife from him, was taken by the
farmers Jan and Claas Louw, as well as Jacob Cloete and Jan van Ellewe,
and finally delivered into the hands of justice by the aforementioned
Cloete and Jan Louw.

All of which are matters of very great and pernicious consequences
which, in a country where justice is practised, may not be tolerated
under any circumstances, but must be restrained as an example and a
deterrent to other such malicious creatures, and be punished severely.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned,
serving today, having seen and read the written *crimineelen eijsch en
conclusie*, drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoner by the
honourable landdrost Jacob Voet, in his official capacity, as well as
having noted the prisoner’s own voluntary confession, properly verified
in court, which was produced with the *eijsch* in order to justify it;
further having pondered everything which possibly served the case and
could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name and on
behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the free United
Netherlands, and having judged the prisoner, is sentencing him with
this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually
executed here and there, having been handed over to the executioner, to
be exposed with a rope around his neck under the gallows, then to be
tied to a stake, to be severely scourged with rods on the bare back,
thereupon to be branded, besides being riveted in chains for a period of
two years, to be sent home to his mistress, provided the same pays the
costs and expenditure of justice.

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 27 March 1721.

Pronounced and executed on the 29^th^ thereupon.

\[signed\] M.P. Chavonnes, K.J. Slotsboo, Jan de la Fontaine, A. v.
Kervel, Jn. Aldersz, C. Valk, Ns. Heijning, J.T. Rhenius, V. Kleinveld,
Fk. Russouw, M. Bergstedt.

In my presence, \[signed\] Dl. Thibault, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Questions, on the requisition of the landdrost Jacob Voet, on which is
to be heard and examined the slave Anthonij van Goa, belonging to the
burgher Beatrix Verweij.

There appears before the undersigned deputised members from the
honourable Council of Justice of this government, the here-named slave
Anthonij, who has answered to the questions below as is noted besides
each one.

Article 1: The prisoner’s name, place of birth and age.

Answer: Anthonij van Goa, about thirty years old at a guess.

Article 2: Whose bondsman is the defendant currently?

Answer: Belonging to Beatrix Verweij, currently living in the
Tijgerbergen.

Article 3: How long ago and by whom he was sold to the same?

Answer: That Oberholster, as his former *baas*, had sold him on his
auction to the aforementioned Beatrix, without knowing the correct date.

Article 4: How long a time the defendant had served the same before he
fled from her for the first time?

Answer: I believe two weeks, but I had a permission letter to go and
fetch my things, which were being looked after by the slaves of Jan
Jurgen Roos, and from there I went to the farm of Abraham Cloete, which
he had bought from my previous *baas*.

Article 5: When this was and what goods he took with him?

Answer: As answered to the aforegoing, and to have taken nothing but a
blanket.

Article 6: Where he then went to?

Answer: The final time to have stayed at Abraham Cloete.

Article 7: How long he remained there and elsewhere?

Answer: That on that evening, after he had gone from the post[^8] of
his mistress, he slept a night on the post of his former master, the
second night on the post of the aforementioned Abraham Cloete and the
day thereafter the *knecht* of his mistress came to get him from there.

Article 8: Who had provided him with necessities at that time?

Answer: That he was called by the slaves to the house of Oberholster and
got food, and also in a similar manner at Cloete’s.

Article 9: Where, as well as by whom the prisoner, was captured?

Answer: By the aforementioned *knecht* of his mistress, on the
aforementioned post of Abraham Cloete.

Article 10: If, when he arrived home, he received punishment?

Answer: Yes.

Article 11: How long thereafter he again ran away from his mistress?

Answer: Eight days after this.

Article 12: Whence he proceeded to and stayed at?

Answer: Directly to the post of Oberholster, but neither he, nor his
wife, saw me, and I stayed in a kloof above the farm of Oberholster, and
at night I was with the bondsmen.

Article 13: If, at this time, he was not inter alia on the farm of his
said *baas* Oberholster, close to Stellenbosch, and if the same was
there on that occasion?

Answer: Yes, but that Oberholster was at the Cape.

Article 14: Who provided the prisoner with food and in what way he
maintained himself there?

Answer: To have been provided by the *meijd* and *jongens* and further
to have maintained himself as it says in article 12.

Article 15: If at that time there was also a woman slave at that place,
and (if so) how named?

Answer: Yes, and is named Jannetie.

Article 16: To whom she belongs, as also if the prisoner had any
acquaintance with the same?

Answer: Oberholster, and she was my own wife when I lived there.

Article 17: If he did not wound the same?

Answer: Yes.

Article 18: In what way he performed this?

Answer: This *meijd* had sworn I will never take another man for as long
as you live, yet when he saw that she was lying with another man, then
my heart ached, I then pushed away the *jongen* and I stabbed her with a
knife in the abdomen.[^9]

Article 19: Why he had did this?

Answer: Because she had a relationship with another.

Article 20: If it was with the intention to kill her?

Answer: Yes.

Article 21: If the knife now shown to him in court is the same knife
with which he had committed the atrocious deed?

Answer: Yes.

Article 22: Where and in what way the prisoner got rid of the same?

Answer: I ran to the thicket with it and when people came to catch me, I
wounded myself and then threw the knife away.

Article 23: How the prisoner was apprehended and got into the hands of
the *eijsscher*?

Answer: By Jan and Claas Louw, as well as Jacob Cloete and Jan van
Ellewe, after which being handed over to the *eijsscher* by Jan Louw and
Jacob Cloete.

Article 24: If he, the prisoner, had given any resistance to those who
wanted to catch him?

Answer: No.

Article 25: In what way did this come to pass?

Answer: I did nothing.

Article 26: If he wounded himself at that time?

Answer: As in article 22.

Article 27: Why he had done this?

Answer: I thought that I could just as well kill myself, to escape the
punishment.

Article 28: If it had been with the same knife with which he also
afflicted the *meijd*?

Answer: Yes.

Article 29: If the prisoner was of the intention to do more mischief
there at that house?

Answer: No.

Article 30: If the prisoner realises that he deserves a heavy punishment
for this crime?

Answer: Yes.

Thus questioned and answered at the Cape of Good Hope on 7 March 1721.

These XXX marks were drawn by Anthonij van Goa.

As delegates, \[signed\] Ns. Heijning, M. Bergstedt.

In my presence, \[signed\] Dl. Thibault, secretary.

Verification

There appears before the undersigned deputised members of the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the here-named slave Anthonij van
Goa, who, after the questions put and the answers given to them had been
read out word by word, declares to fully persist by them, not desiring
that anything more should be added or taken from them.

Thus done and verified in the Dutch language, which the prisoner
understands and speaks reasonably, in the Castle of Good Hope on 8 March
1721.

These XXX marks were drawn by Anthonij van Goa.

As delegates, \[signed\] Ns. Heijning, M. Bergstedt.

In my presence, \[signed\] Dl. Thibault, secretary.

[^1]: * Sales were relatively frequent, since the Dutch laws of
    inheritance, which often divided up estates amongst a large number
    of heirs, frequently led to the break-up of slaveholdings, and
    auctions of household goods (which included slaves) were regular
    occurrences. Sometimes slaves were bought by relatives, but they
    were still usually transferred to new locations and separated from
    the other slaves with whom they had lived, worked and formed
    relationships, Worden 1985: 49-50 and Shell 1994: 104-21. *

[^2]: * Slave marriage was not made legal until 1823. Only freed slaves
    were allowed to marry before then, Shell 1994: 320. Nonetheless,
    some slaves formed permanent partnerships which were often referred
    to by the authorities as ‘concubinage’. See 1749 Reijnier van
    Madagascar n. 1 for a discussion of this. *

[^3]: * The *eijsch* recommended that Anthonij be executed by hanging
    with a knife displayed over his head, CJ 325, ff. 76-7. There is no
    record of this case in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 7 \[1721\], but it is
    apparent from the statement at the end of the *sententie* that the
    milder sentence here proposed was carried out on 29 March 1721. *

[^4]:  On Beatrix Verweij, an aged widow who lived alone on a frontier
    farm with her ten slaves, see Schoeman 2004: 232-35.

[^5]:  On the meaning and significance of this, see 1786 Augustus van de
    Caab et al., n. 8.

[^6]:  The omentum is a double fold of fatty membrane attached to the
    stomach and hanging over the intestine, just underneath the skin of
    the abdomen (Solomon 1992: 212-13).

[^7]:  This medical evidence is taken from the surgeon’s report, CJ 325,
    document 10.

[^8]:  In addition to their main, residential farm many Cape farmers,
    especially in the earlier decades of the eighteenth century, also
    owned one or more cattle posts in the interior. These farms tended
    to be loan farms, used exclusively for grazing.

[^9]:  The original is also in this mixture of the first and third
    person, direct and indirect speech.
