1.  JAN BOTMA

*In two separate, but remarkably similar, cases in 1729, Stellenbosch
burghers were each found guilty of causing the death of one of their
slaves by excessive punishment. Here we print the records from one of
them.*^*[^1]*^* Jan Botma confessed to ordering the beating of his slave
Joseph van Malabaar (the job was performed by other slaves), but the
precise cause of Joseph’s death remained unclear. Much was made of the
fact that he drank rain water from the ground after his beating –
over-consumption of water when the body was heated after a beating was
believed to be a cause of illness and possibly death.*^*[^2]*^* The
surgeon reported that none of the wounds on Joseph’s body were ‘mortal’
and his verdict was death by drowning. The court nonetheless found Botma
guilty of causing the death of his slave by excessive whipping, although
he stated that he was not aware he had done any wrong. Unlike Jan de
Thuilot, who was sentenced to death in 1708 for killing a slave (see
case above), Botma was fined 100 rixdollars and ordered to pay
costs.*^*[^3]*^* That he was not let off completely shows that the
Company regarded maltreatment of slaves leading to death as a punishable
offence.*^*[^4]*^

**CJ 333** Criminele Process Stukken, 1729, ff. 268-70.

Interrogatoriën, omme daarop, ter requisitie van den landdrost Pieter
Lourensz, gehoord en ondervraagt te werden, den burger Jan Botma.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deses gouvernements, den burger Jan Botma,
dewelke op de onderstaande vraagen sodanig heeft geantwoord als ter
zijde van een ijder staat geschreven.

Articul 1: Hoe zijn gevangens naam, geboorteplaats en ouderdom is.

Antwoord: Jan Botma, geboortig van Cabo de Goede Hoop, oud 27 jaaren.

Articul 2: Waar voor alhier bescheijden, en waar woonagtig is?

Antwoord: Landbouwer te sijn, en te woonen aan Stellenbosch.

Articul 3: Off hij gevangen niet seekeren slaaf, genaamt Joseph, op den
8^e^ der jongst gepasseerde maand Junij, heeft doen uijttrekken,
vastbinden en vervolgens laaten geesselen?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 4: Om welke reedenen hij gevangen sulx heeft laaten doen?

Antwoord: Omdat die slaaf de kleederen van een slavin van hem gevangen
van ’t lijf hadde afgescheurt en groot geweld gemaakt, mitsgaders ook
die slavin getrapt en geslaagen.

Articul 5: Waar, en door wien, hij gevangen gemelte slaaff Joseph heeft
laaten geesselen, alsook waarmeede?

Antwoord: Ik heb hem op een leer laaten vastbinden en dus met gespleete
rottangs geesselen.

Articul 6: Off sulx niet op zijn gevangens hoffsteede, waar woonagtigh
is, en door zijn gevangens slaven Aaron en Domingo, heeft laaten doen?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 7: En off sulx ook niet verrigt is op zijn gevangens ordre met
gespleete rottangs?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 8: Off hem gevangen ook bewust is dat gezegde slaaff Joseph
waater heeft gedronken?

Antwoord: Ja, die slaaf heeft water gedronken nadat gegeeselt was
geworden, en wel sodanig dat des gevangens slaaven Aaron en Domingo hem
van de watercuijl hebben moeten wegdragen.

Articul 9: Waarvan, en wanneer even gemelte slaaff Joseph is koomen te
sterven?

Antwoord: Ik weet niet waaraan die slaaf is gestorven, dog hij is daags
nadat gegeesselt was geworden, des morgens dood gevonden.

Articul 10: Off hij gevangen niet moet bekennen dat over zijne begaane
handelinge ten hoogsten straffbaar is?

Antwoord: Ik weet niet daaraan misdaan te hebben, en hadde ik geweeten
daaraan quaalijk te doen, ik soude ’t niet hebben gedaan. Was ik ook
niet siekelijk geweest, ik soude die slaaf de eijgensten avond aan
Stellenbosch gebragt hebben.

Aldus gevraagt ende beantwoord in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 28 Julij
1729.

\[get.\] Jan Botma.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] Cl. Brand, Hendk. Oostwalt Eksteen.

Mij present, \[get.\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretaris.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deses gouvernements, den burger Jan Botma,
dewelke de bovenstaande vraagen met sijn daarop gegevene antwoorden van
woord tot woord klaar en duijdelijk voorgelesen sijnde, verclaarde
daarbij volkomen te persisteeren, niet begeerende oversulx datter iets
meer bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal, als alleenig dat hij
gevraagde die slaaf Joseph omtrent een half uure met tusschenpoosinge
heeft laten slaan, om hem ondertusschen te ondervraagen.

Aldus gerecolleert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 29^e^ Julij 1729.

\[get.\] Jan Botma.

Als gecommitts., \[get.\] Cl. Brand, Hendk. Oostwalt Eksteen.

Mij present, \[get.\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretaris.

**CJ 333** Criminele Process Stukken, 1729, ff. 271r-v.

Relaas gedaan door Domingo van Goa, lijffeigen van den landtbouwer Jan
Botma, ter requisitie van den Landdrost Pieter Lourensz., naamentlijk:

Dat hij relateur op Woensdag den 8^e^ deeser loopende maand Junij,
omtrent den avondt, t’ huis koomende, sijn meester Jan Botma, voormelt,
hem relateur gelast heeft seekere sijne meede slaaf, genaamt Joseph van
Malabaar (die naakt op een ladder gebonden was, en bereets door sijn
meesters slaaf Aaron was geslaagen), met gespleete rottingen te helpen
geesselen.

Dat hij relateur sulcs, benevens den voormelte Aaron, omtrent een half
uur met tusschenpoosingen verrigt hebbende, op ordre van sijn relateurs
meester, gemelte slaaf Joseph hebben losgebonden, als wanneer denselve
in de combuis is gegaen, alwaar eenigen tijdt geseten hebbende, buiten
de deure is gegaen en aldaar uit een kuil regenwater tot twee maalen
heeft gedronken.

Dat hij relateur alsdoen heeft gesien dat voormelte slaaf Aaron den
dickwils genoemde Joseph van dat water heeft weggenoomen en op desselfs
kooij gebragt, alwaar denselven ook dien nagt daaraan is koomen te
sterven.

Aldus gedaan en gerelateert in de Nederduitsche taale, die den relateur
seer wel verstaat en spreekt, op Stellenbosch, den 11 Junij 1729.

Dit X is ’t merk van den relateur, Domingo van Goa.

Als getuigen, \[get.\] Hans Conterman, Johannis van Ellewe.

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] P. Mazot, secretaris.

**CJ 333** Criminele Process Stukken, 1729, ff. 272r-v.

Relaas gedaan door Aaron van Madagascar, lijffeijgen van den landbouwer
Jan Botma, ter requisitie van den landdrost Pieter Lourensz.,
namentlijk:

Dat sijn relateurs meester Jan Botma, voornoemt, op Woensdagh den
aghsten deeser loopende maand Junij, hem gelast heeft sijn relateurs
meede slaaf, genaemt Joseph van Malabaar de kleederen uit te trecken,
vervolgens op een ladder te binden, en alsoo met gespleete rottings op
de bloote rugge te geesselen.

Dat hij relateur eenigen tijdt met geesselen beesig geweest zijnde, sijn
relateurs meede slaaf, genaamt Domingo insgelijks door sijn meester is
gecommandeert geworden den voormelde slaaf Joseph met roeden te
geesselen.

Dat hij relateur, beneevens voorseijde Domingo, naer dat dickwils
genoemde slaaf Joseph omtrent een uur met eenige tusschenpoosingen
hadden geslaagen, op ordre van sijn relateurs voorseijde meester
denselven hebben losgemaekt, als wanneer meergemelte slaaf Joseph in de
combuis is gegaan, alwaar eenigen tijdt geseeten hebbende, is buiten de
deure gegaen, en aldaar uit een kuil reegenwaater tot twee maalen heeft
gedronken.

Dat hij relateur voormelde slaaf Joseph bij die kuil leggen vindende,
denselven heeft opgenoomen en op sijn kooij gelegt, alwaar ook die naght
daaraan is komen te sterven.

Aldus gedaan en gerelateert in de Nederduitsche taale, die de relateur
seer wel verstaat en spreekt, op Stellenbosch, den 11^e^ Junij 1729.

Dit X is ’t merk van den relateur, Aaron van Madagascar.

Als getuigen, \[get.\] Hans Conterman, Johannis van Ellewe.

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] P. Mazot, secretaris.

**CJ 333** Criminele Process Stukken, 1729, f. 274.

Ik, ondergeteekende chirurgijn aan Drakensteijn, attesteere, ter
requisitie van den landdrost Pieter Lourensz., dat op den 10^e^ deeser
loopende maand Junij, ten overstaan van gecommitteerde heemraden, hebben
gevisiteert op de plaats van Jan Botma, zeekere doode slaaff, genaamt
Joseph, toebehoorende voorseijde Botma, en bevonden dat deselve waar
gegeesselt, dogh geen dood wonden aan denselven bevonden, maar
presumeeren dat dien jongen Joseph naar de geesselingh door ’t water
moet zijn gesmoort, aangesien denselven het waater, wanneer omgekeert
wierd, uijt de mond liep.

Alle ’twelke presenteere, desnoods, nader te bekragtigen.

Stellenbosch, den 20^e^ Junij 1729.

\[get.\] Js. Cl. Schabort.

TRANSLATION

Interrogation, on the requisition of the landdrost Pieter Lourensz, in
which is to be heard and questioned the burgher Jan Botma.

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the burgher Jan Botma, who has
answered to the questions below in such a way as is written next to each
one.

Article 1: What is the prisoner’s, name, place of birth, and age?

Answer: Jan Botma, born at the Cape of Good Hope, 27 years old.

Article 2: Working as what here, and where resident?

Answer: As a farmer, and to live at Stellenbosch.

Article 3: If the prisoner, on the 8^th^ of the past month June, had a
certain slave, named Joseph, be undressed, tied up and then beaten?

Answer: Yes.

Article 4: For what reason the prisoner had this done?

Answer: Because this slave had torn the clothes from the body of a woman
slave belonging to the prisoner and committed lots of violence, besides
kicking and beating this woman slave.

Article 5: Where and by whom the prisoner had the said slave Joseph
whipped, as also with what?

Answer: I had him tied onto a ladder and whipped thus with split canes.

Article 6: If this had been done at the prisoner’s farm, which is where
he resides, and by his slaves Aaron and Domingo?

Answer: Yes.

Article 7: And also if this was performed with split canes on the
prisoner’s order?

Answer: Yes.

Article 8: If the prisoner is also aware that the said slave Joseph had
drunk water?

Answer: Yes, this slave drank water after he was whipped, and even to
such an extent that the prisoner’s slaves, Aaron and Domingo, had to
carry him away from the water hole.

Article 9: From what, and when, the said slave Joseph came to die?

Answer: I do not know from what the slave died, but he was found dead in
the morning of the day after he had been whipped.

Article 10: If the prisoner must not admit that he is highly punishable
because of the actions he committed?

Answer: I do not know to have offended by it, and if I had known to do
wrong by it, I would not have done it. Also, had I not been unwell, I
would have brought this slave to Stellenbosch that very same evening.

Thus questioned and answered in the Castle of Good Hope on 28 July 1729.

\[signed\] Jan Botma.

As delegates, \[signed\] Cl. Brand, Hendk. Oostwalt Eksteen.

In my presence, \[signed\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the burgher Jan Botma, who, after
the questions above with his answers to them had been read out word by
word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore
not desiring that anything be added to or taken away from it, except
only that he had the slave Joseph beaten for about half an hour, with
breaks in-between, during which to question him.

Thus verified in the Castle of Good Hope on 29 July 1729.

\[signed\] Jan Botma.

As delegates, \[signed\] Cl. Brand, Hendk. Oostwalt Eksteen.

In my presence, \[signed\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Statement given by Domingo van Goa, bondsman of the farmer Jan Botma, on
the requisition of the landdrost Pieter Lourensz, namely:

That when the testifier came home around evening on the 8^th^ of this
current month June, his master, the aforementioned Jan Botma, ordered
him to help whip with split canes a certain fellow slave, named Joseph
van Malabaar (who was naked and bound to a ladder, and already being
beaten by his master’s slave, Aaron).

That the testifier having done this for about half an hour, with breaks
in-between, together with the aforementioned Aaron, untied the said
slave Joseph on the order of his master. Which is when the same
\[Joseph\] went to the kitchen, where he sat for a while, after which he
went outside through the door and, up to two times, drank there from a
pool of rain water.

That the testifier then saw the aforementioned slave Aaron taking the
said Joseph away from the water and bringing him to his bed, where the
same also came to die that night.

Thus done and related in the Dutch language, which the testifier
understands and speaks very well, at Stellenbosch on 11 June 1729.

This X is the mark of the testifier, Domingo van Goa.

As witnesses, \[signed\] Hans Conterman, Johannis van Ellewe.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] P. Mazot, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Statement given by Aaron van Madagascar, bondsman of the farmer Jan
Botma, on the requisition of the landdrost Pieter Lourensz, namely:

That the testifier’s master, the aforementioned Jan Botma, had ordered
him on Wednesday, the 8^th^ of this current month June, to remove the
clothes of his fellow slave, named Joseph van Malabaar, next, to tie him
onto a ladder, and to whip him thus on the bare back with split canes.

That when the testifier had been busy whipping for some time, his fellow
slave, named Domingo, was likewise commanded by his master to whip the
aforementioned slave Joseph with rods.

That the testifier with the aforesaid Domingo, after having beaten the
aforementioned slave Joseph for about one hour, with some breaks
in-between, untied the same on the order of his master. Which is when
the aforementioned slave Joseph went into the kitchen and, after having
sat there for a while, went outside through the door and drank there, up
to two times, from a pool of rain water.

That the testifier, finding the aforementioned slave Joseph lying by the
pool, picked him up and lay him down on his bed, which is where he also
came to die that night.

Thus done and related in the Dutch language, which the testifier
understands and speaks very well, at Stellenbosch on 11 June 1729.

This X is the mark of the testifier, Aaron van Madagascar.

As witnesses, \[signed\] Hans Conterman, Johannis van Ellewe.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] P. Mazot, secretary.

TRANSLATION

I, the undersigned surgeon of Drakenstein, attest, on the requisition of
the landdrost Pieter Lourensz, to have examined, on the 10^th^ of this
current month June and in the presence of the deputised *heemraden*, on
the farm of Jan Botma a certain dead slave, named Joseph, belonging to
the aforesaid Botma, and to have found that the same was whipped,
although unable to find any mortal wounds on the same, but presumes that
this *jongen* Joseph must have drowned in the water, seeing that, when
he had turned the same over, water ran from his mouth.

All of which I offer, if necessary, to confirm subsequently.

Stellenbosch, 20 June 1729,

\[signed\] Js. Cl. Schabort.

[^1]: * The other burgher was Jan Steenkamp, who claimed that he had
    only allowed his slave Hector to be whipped for ‘niet langer als een
    pijp tobacq rookens’ (no longer than it takes to smoke a pipe of
    tobacco). He was fined 50 rixdollars, CJ 11, ff. 49-50. See Schoeman
    2004: 204-6 for a discussion of the Steenkamp case. *

[^2]: * See 1740 Daniel Lourich, n. 8 for evidence of this opinion.*

[^3]: * CJ 11, ff. 48-9. There is no *sententie* for this case. The
    *eijsch* recommended that Botma be banished from the Cape for ten
    years as an example to others (CJ 333, f. 267), but this was not
    upheld by the court. The fiscal argued that Botma, as former
    *heemraad*, should have known better. For comments on this case, see
    Biewenga 1999: 58.*

[^4]: * Only two years later, in 1731, a *plakkaat* was issued against
    the maltreatment of slaves, which commented on recent cases in which
    owners had murdered their slaves, *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 149-50.
    The immediate cause of this was a horrific case of sadistic abuse of
    a slave by his owner, Christiaan Gottlieb Opperman (Shell 1994:
    208), but clearly the authorities also had cases like that of Jan
    Botma in mind. For discussion of punishment of owners for the murder
    of their slaves, see 1707 Jan de Thuilot. *
