# JEPHTA VAN BATAVIA

*This case of jealousy by a male slave over a female slave with whom he
had previously had a relationship, leading to him stabbing her, shows
how slaves, despite their unfree status, still managed to have emotional
relationships and contacts with other slaves. It thus gives a rare
glimpse into the world of the slaves which existed alongside that of
their owners. The case is striking for the strong expression of Jephta’s
emotions, he declaring that he wanted her death even though he might be
broken on the wheel for it. Jephta’s owner[^1] was not prepared to
pay the costs of the trial, and was willing to relinquish this
troublesome slave to the Company, which was glad to accept a ‘healthy’
slave convict labourer.[^2] *

**CJ 785** Sententiën, 1726-1735, ff. 178-82.

Alsoo Jephta van Batavia, leijfeijgen van den burger Johannes Heufke,
oud 30 jaaren, thans ’s heeren gevangen, buijten pijn ofte dwang van
banden, van ijsers, dan wel de minste bedreijging van dien, vrijwillig
heeft beleeden ende den edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses
gouvernements ook duijdelijk is gebleeken:

Dat hij gevangen op Dingsdag morgen, zijnde geweest den 30^e^ der
voorleedene maand Augustus, door zijnen leijfheer, Johannes Heufke, naar
zijn plaats, geleegen aan ’t Rondebosje, gesonden zijnde, omme aldaar te
vertoeven, wel des morgens naar derwaarts is gegaan maar, in steede van
aan de ordre van zijnen baas te gehoorsaamen en daar te verbleijven, ter
contrarie des voormiddags om neegen uuren al weederom aan de Caab terug
is gekoomen, bleijvende dus alhier omswerven tot des avonds omtrent
seeven uuren, als wanneer hij gevangen sig in de wooninge van zijnen
booven genoemde leijfheer, staande agter ’s Compagnies hospitaal, heeft
begeeven, drinkende sig vervolgens in de wijnkelder dronken, waar naar
hij gevangen seekere zijne meede slavin, Maria van Ceijlon genaamt, daar
ten huijse meede woonagtig en bij dewelke hij gevangen eenigen tijd
gehouden heeft, voor de deur heeft geroepen, die ook uijt dien hoofde
bij hem gevangen is gekoomen, bleijvende in de deur staan, bij welke
geleegentheijd hij Jephta van Batavia teegens die slavin Maria heeft
gesegt: Waarom doe je mij quaad?, meijnende daar meede dat zij ’t met
iemand anders als met hem hadde gehouden ofte vleeschelijk
geconverseert.

Dat hij gevangen vervolgens met voorseijde slaavin Maria in huijs is
gegaan, gaande met haar beijde op de trap sitten, alwaar hij gevangen
deselve heeft vast gehouden, totdat zij los geraakt zijnde, van hem
gevangen is weggegaan, naar ende in de bottelerij, staande in de
combuijs, werwaarts hij gevangen die slavin heeft vervolgt, en haar
immediatelijk met een mes, dat hij gemeenlijk bij sig droeg en bevoorens
scherp gemaakt hadde, op een moorddadige wijse een steek in de linker
zeijde van de borst heeft toegebragt, waarmeede hij gevangen nogh niet
tevreeden zijnde, meergenoemde slavin Maria, soo als zij in de combuijs
de vlugt nam, nogmaals een steek in de regter borst toegebragt heeft,
waarvan deselve ter aarde is gevallen.

Dat zij Maria van Ceijlon daarop opgestaan, en naar vooren gevlugt
zijnde, de burgeresse Johanna Lens en den metzelaar Baarend Smit teegens
hem gevangen hebben gesegt: Jephta, wat doe je daar, weet je wel dat je
Maria gequest \[*sic*\] hebt, en weet je niet wat daarop volgt?, daar
hij gevangen in verwoetheijd op antwoorde: Maske raadbraaken, ik sal
haar vermoorden, ik sal haar het hert op vreeten, ik soek mijn dood.

Alle ’twelke zijnde gruwelstukken en ongehoorde wreetheijd, die in een
land daar de justitie wel geadministreert word, niet te verdraagen is,
maar ter contrarie tot stuijting van ’t quaad en ten spiegel van andere
booswigten op ’t rigoureuste moet werden gestraft.

Weshalven soo is ’t, dat den edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses
gouvernements, ten dage dienende, gesien ende gehoord den schriftelijken
crimineelen eijsch door den heer Independent Fiscaal Adriaan van Kervel
*ex officio* op ende jeegens den gevangen gedaan ende genoomen, weijders
met aandagt van raade geleth hebbende op desselfs vrijwillige confessie,
behoorlijk gerecolleert, en op ’tgeene voorts in deesen te letten stond,
doende regt uijt naame ende van weegen de hoogmoogende de Heeren Staaten
Generaal der vrije Vereenigde Neederlanden, den gevangen Jephta van
Batavia hebben gecondemneert, gelijk haar Edel Agtbaarens denselven
condemneeren mits deesen: om gebragt te werden ter plaatse alwaar men
alhier gewoon is crimineele sententiën uijt te voeren, en aldaar den
scherpregter overgeleevert zijnde, eerst met de strop om den hals onder
de galg te pronk staan, vervolgens met ’t moordgeweer, ofte mes
waarmeede hij de daad begaan heeft, booven ’t hooft aan een paal
gebonden, op de bloote rugge strengelijk gegeesselt en daarop
gebrandmerkt te werden, en voorts den tijd van 10 jaaren in de ketting
*ad opus publicum *voor niets te arbeijden, met condemnatie in de costen
en mise van justitie.

Aldus gedaan ende gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 13^e^
October 1729.

Mitsgaders gepronuntieert ende geëxecuteert den 15^e^ daaraanvolgende.

\[get.\] J.T. Rhenius, Ns. Heijning, H. Swellengrebel, Cl. Brand, Js.
Möller, R. Tulbagh, Hendk. Oostwald Eksteen, J. Blanckenberg, G. la
Febre.

Mij present, \[get.\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

As Jephta van Batavia, bondsman of the burgher Johannes Heufke, 30 years
old, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntary confessed without
any torture or coercion of bonds, of irons, or the least threat of
suchlike, and since it also appeared evident to the honourable Council
of Justice of this government:

That on Tuesday morning, which was the 30^th\ ^of the previous month
August, the prisoner was sent by his owner, Johannes Heufke, to his farm
situated at Rondebosch, in order to stay at that place. He did go there
in the morning, but instead of obeying the command of his *baas* by
staying there, he, on the contrary, had returned to the Cape already by
nine o’clock that morning; remaining here and wandering around until
seven o’clock at night, at which time the prisoner went into his
aforementioned master’s house, situated behind the Company’s hospital,
where he then got himself drunk in the wine cellar. After this the
prisoner called to the door a certain fellow slave, by the name of Maria
van Ceijlon, who also lives at that house and with whom the prisoner has
had a relationship for some time; which is also the reason why she came
to him and remained standing in the door; at which point he, Jephta van
Batavia, said to the slave Maria: “Why are you hurting me?”, meaning
with this that she was having a relationship or has had carnal knowledge
with someone other than him.

That the prisoner thereupon went into the house with the aforesaid slave
Maria, and the two of them sat down upon the stairs where he held her
until she, having extricated herself, went away from him and into the
pantry inside the kitchen, to which the prisoner followed her and
immediately, in a murderous manner, gave her a stab in the left side of
her chest with the knife that he ordinarily carries with him and which
he had sharpened just before. However, the prisoner was not satisfied
with this, but once again gave the aforementioned slave Maria, as she
fled into the kitchen, a stab on her right breast, as a result of which
she fell down onto the ground.

That she, Maria van Ceijlon, thereupon got up and fled to the front,
where the burgher Johanna Lens and the mason Baarend Smit said to him,
the prisoner: “Jephta, what are you doing, do you realise that you have
wounded Maria, and do you know what the consequences will be?” to which
the prisoner answered in a rage: “*Masque raadbraaken*,^\ [^3]^ I shall
kill her, I shall devour her heart, I want my death”.

All of which are atrocious deeds and unheard-of cruelty which, in a
country where justice is administered well, cannot be tolerated but, on
the contrary, must be punished most rigorously, in order to check the
evil and to serve as an example to other villains.

Wherefore it is thus, that the honourable Council of Justice of this
government, serving today, having seen and heard the written
*crimineelen eijsch* drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoner
by the honourable independent fiscal Adriaan van Kervel in his official
capacity, and moreover, having noted with carefully considered counsel
the former’s voluntary confession, properly verified, and everything
further that should be noted in this \[case\], practising justice in the
name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the
free United Netherlands and, having judged the prisoner, Jephta van
Batavia, their honours are sentencing him with this: to be taken to the
place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, and there
being handed over to the executioner, firstly to be exposed with a rope
around his neck under the gallows, thereafter to be tied to a stake with
the murder weapon, or the knife with which he had committed the deed,
above his head, and to be severely scourged on the bare back, thereafter
to be branded, whereafter to labour in chains, without payment, on the
public works for the period of ten years, with sentencing to the costs
and expenditure of justice.[^4]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 13 October 1729.

Moreover pronounced and executed on the 15^th\ ^thereupon.

\[signed\] J.T. Rhenius, Ns. Heijning, H. Swellengrebel, Cl. Brand, Js.
Möller, R. Tulbagh, Hendk. Oostwald Eksteen, J. Blanckenberg, G. la
Febre.

In my presence, \[signed\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretary.

[^1]: * Johannes Heufke, a member of the Cape burgher elite, who
    obtained part of the monopolies to sell brandy and Cape wine every
    year between 1726 and 1731. From other documentation (CJ 333, ff.
    295-96) we know that he did not operate a tavern from his own house
    at the time of this case, but it certainly served, as with many of
    the other *pachters*, as a warehouse for his alcohol, hence Jephta’s
    being able to drink himself into a stupor there. On Heufke, see Hoge
    1946: 157. *

[^2]: * The testimonies of Jephta van Batavia, Maria van Ceijlon,
    Johanna Lens, Barend Smit van Groningen and a surgeon’s report on
    Maria’s wounds are preserved in CJ 333, ff. 308-16.*

[^3]:  In the phrase ‘masque raadbraaken’, the last word is the Dutch
    verb ‘to be broken upon the wheel’, while the first is the Creole
    Portuguese *maski* meaning ‘never mind, although, even (so), in
    spite of’ (from Portuguese *mas que*). Thus this phrase literally
    means: ‘never mind \[being\] broken on the wheel’. The word *maski*
    had been in use at the Cape from the late seventeenth century
    (Franken 1953: 48, 204), seemingly by both slaves and Khoikhoi as a
    modal element in their varieties of Dutch and eventually became part
    of incipient Afrikaans, being quite common in nineteenth-century
    texts. Curiously, with the linguistic engineering that resulted in
    modern standard Afrikaans, it disappeared from the language, being
    only retained in the archaic *almaskie*, ‘nevertheless’ (Roberge
    2002: 398-404).

[^4]:  This was more lenient than the death sentence by hanging which
    the fiscal recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 333, f. 307. The lesser
    sentence was confirmed, CJ 11, ff. 56-7, but Heufke was unwilling to
    pay the costs and instead offered to make Jephta over to the VOC,
    which the Council of Policy happily accepted since Jephta was in
    such a ‘kloeke, jonge en gesonde gesteltheijd’ (fine, young and
    healthy condition), *Resolusies*, vol. 8: 60-1. Such a statement
    contradicts the fiscal’s claim that Jephta was an atrocious villain.
    Doubtless his suitability to undertake heavy labour overrode any
    qualms the Company might have had in taking him into their control.
    It also points to the fact that the phrase ‘with the costs’ was no
    empty one, but a real factor (see De Kock 1950: 167). From 1730
    onwards, Jephta appears on the *Bandieten rollen* of prisoners on
    Robben Island with this annotation next to his name: ‘geweesen slaaf
    van den burger Johannes Heufke, en door hem voor de costen aan den
    E. Comp. geschonken, voor hoe lang: 10 jaar, gesententieerd:
    13.10.1729’ (former slave of the burgher Johannes Heufke and donated
    by him to the honourable Company for the costs, for how long: 10
    years, sentenced: 13.10.1729), CJ 3188, ff. 46-7 et seq.
