# JANUARIJ VAN TUTOCORIJN

*Januarij van Tutocorijn[^1] was maltreated by his owner, the
widow Van der Spuij, for failing to bring home sufficient koeli
geld.[^2] He was beaten and sent out again without being fed, and
so secretly slept over in the house of another burgher, being discovered
there by the slaves and sent to the authorities. *

*Two issues are striking in this case. One is the expectation of urban
owners that their slaves must earn money for them, or in Januarij’s case
could be maltreated when they did not (Van der Spuij’s cruelty was
attested by the other slaves in her household). But also notable is the
response of the fiscal. Despite no evidence that Januarij was doing
anything more than seeking shelter for the night away from a vindictive
owner, the fiscal assumed that he was up to no good. He commented that a
houseowner would be legally entitled to kill a strange ‘swarte jongen’
whom he found in his house at night. This was in the year of a general
panic by the authorities that slaves in and around Cape Town were
getting out of control, which might explain the fiscal’s
concern.[^3] Widow Van der Spuij’s maltreatment was, in his
opinion, irrelevant. The court was, however, more merciful and imposed a
lesser sentence. *

**CJ 341** Criminele Process Stukken, 1737, ff. 397-98.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie des Casteels de Goede Hoop, Januarij van
Tutocorijn, slaaff van de weduwe Melt van der Spuij, oud naer gissing 20
jaeren, dewelke, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscaal,
meester Daniel van den Henghel, confesseeerde hoe waer is:

Dat over wijnige dagen geleeden, sonder den juijsten datum te kunnen
seggen, hij confessant des avonds terugge koomende sonder coeli geld te
kunnen brengen, daerom door sijn lijfvrouw deerlijk geslaegen wierd en
vervolgens, sonder eeten te kreijgen, uijtgesonden om coeli geld te
winnen, dog hij geslaegen en uijtgehongert sijnde, is hij stilletjes in
’t huijs van den burger Nicolaas Cochelius gekroopen en, naer aldaer een
stuk brood genoomen en gegeeten te hebben, is hij op solder gegaen en,
daer een combaers met wat slaap goed bij den anderen gekreegen hebbende,
heeft hij, alsoo niet thuijs dorst terugge keeren, sig daerop te rust
begeven, werdende in de nagt door een jonge en een meijd van ’t huijs
wacker gemaekt en in handen van de Justitie overgelevert.

Aldus geconfesseert aen Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 2^e\ ^September 1737,
voor d’ edele J.T. Rhenius en Jan de Wit, leeden uijt den edelagtbare
Raed van Justitie, voornoemt, die de minute deeses, benevens den
conffessant ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie des Casteel de Goede Hoop, den slaef
Januarij van Tutocorijn, dewelke deese, zijne gegeevene confessie, van
woord tot woord, klaer en duijdelijk, voorgeleesen sijnde, verclaerde
daerbij volkoomen te persisteeren, niet begeerende oversulx datter iets
meer bijgevoegt ofte van gedaen werden sal.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, in de Neederduijtsche tael,
die den confessant reedelijk wel spreekt ende verstaet, den 4^e^
September 1737, voor d’ edele J.T. Rhenius en Jan de Wit, leeden uijt
welopgemelde edelagtbare Raed, die de minute deeses, beneeevens de
confessant ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretaris.

**CJ 341** Criminele Process Stukken, 1737, ff. 394-96.

Dictum ter rolle

Edelachtbare Heer en Heeren,

Om dit dictum met korte woorden te bewaarheden, soo legt den eijsscher
eenlijk over de gerecolleerde confessie van den gedaagde, waaruijt U
Edel Achtbaarens sal koomen te blijken:

Hoe den gevangen eenige dagen geledene, volgens sijn seggen, des avonds
sonder sijn opgelegt koeli geld te kunne meede brengen, sig naar sijn
lijffvrouws huijs heeft begeven, werdende aanstonds, omdat gemelde geld
niet opbracht, door sijn lijffvrouw, de weduwe Van der Spuij, deerlijk
geslagen en vervolgens, om dat geld te soeken, weder opstond sonder
eeten uijtgesonden, dog, soo segt, deerlijk geslagen en uijtgehongert
sijnde, en gevolglijk niet in staat om coelij \[*sic*\] te soeken, is
hij stilletjes des avonds geslopen in het huijs van den burger Nicolaas
Cochelius, steelende en eetende aldaar het brood dat vond, soo is hij
stilletjes naar boven op de solder gegaan, en sig met een combaars
toedekkende, is hij alsoo niet dorst t’ huijs koomen, maar gaan leggen
slaapen, dog sekerlijk omdat gerugt maakte, in de nag gehoort en, door
de slaave van het huijs ontdekt sijnde, is hij des ogtens \[*sic*\] om
vier uuren uijt order van gemelde burger Cochelius naar de tronk
gebragt, nevens een combaars en eenige slegte hooftkussens, die bij en
op sijn lijff laagen. En schoon nu deese gaauwdieff ontkent aldaar in
huijs iets te hebben gestoolen off met een quaad insigt in dat huijs
geslopen te sijn, en tot sijn onschult bijbrengt dat van sijn lijffvrouw
veel slaagen en weijnig eeten krijgt, soo is egter dit gedoente van veel
quaade gevolgen en is te meer strafbaar in deese gaauwdieff naar dien
hij al voor de derde reijs dus des nagts, dan in den een en dan in den
anderen, sijn huijs op die wijs is geatrappeert geworden, want niemant
kan vermoet werde in een ander mans huijs dus bij nagt in te sluijpen en
sig op te houde, als tot een quaad eijnde, namentlijk om, off te
steelen, te moorden, off selvs wel brand te stigten, buijten dat soude
den heer van een huijs, des nagts een vreemde swarte jongen in sijn
huijs vindende, denselve, en gantsch met de regte overeen komende, doot
konne steeke off schieten, buijten en behalve dat soo een gaauwdieff aan
vrouw en kinderen, daar geen man in huijs is, dodelijke alteratie en
ongemakken soude konnen veroorsaken, derhalven een saak in allen deele
gevaarlijk en derhalve strafbaar.

Off nu de voorwending dier jongen, dat door sijn lijffvrouw continueel
geslagen word wanneer sijn opgelegde coeli geld niet opbrengt, en
bovensdien seer weijnig te eeten krijgt, den gevangen eenige verligting
kan baaren, wil den eijsscher eenlijk overlaaten aan het oordeel van U
Edel Achtbaarens, daar eenlijk bijvoegende dat alle jongens die van de
gemelde vrouw in de tronk sijn gebragt, deselvde klaagliederen aen den
eijsscher singen dog, het sij daar meede soo het wil, die gaauwdieff is
egter straffbaar.

Waarom den eijsscher tot weeringe van alle diergelijke nagtbesoeken, en
tot voorkooming van alle ongelukken die daaruijt soude konnen
voortvloeijen, met goed regt vermeijnt te mogen en moeten concludeeren,
gelijk doet bij deesen:

Concludeert dat de gevangen en gedaagden in den hoofde deeses gemeldt,
bij diffinitive vonnisse van U Edel Achtbaarens, mag werden
gecondemneert: omme aan een paal gebonden sijnde, door de caffers
strengelijk te werden gelaarst, en voorts in de ketting geklonken
zijnde, daarinne den tijd van agtien agtereenvolgende maanden voor niet
aan ’s edele Compagnies gemeene werken te arbeijden, met de kosten, ofte
tot alsulken fine als ’t U Edel Achtbaarens sullen bevinden te behooren.

*Exhibitum in judicio*, den 12^e^ September 1737.

\[get.\] D. van den Henghel.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, Januarij van Tutocorijn,
slave of the widow of Melt van der Spuij, 20 years old at a guess, who,
on requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, *Meester* Daniel
van den Henghel, confesses it to be true:

That more than a few days ago, without being able to tell the correct
date, the confessant, returning home in the evening without having been
able to earn *koeli geld*, was miserably beaten by his owner and
afterwards sent out, without getting his meal, to earn his *koeli geld*.
However, since he was beaten and starving, he secretly crawled into the
house of the burgher Nicolaas Cochelius, and, after having taken there a
piece of bread and eaten it, went to the attic and, having obtained
there from the others a blanket with some bedding, then lay down to rest
since he did not dare to return home. During the night he was roused by
a *jongen* and a *meijd* of the house, and delivered into the hands of
justice.

Thus confessed at the Cape of Good Hope on 2 September 1737 before the
honourables J. T. Rhenius and Jan de Wit, members of the aforementioned
honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed the original of
this, together with the confessant and me, the secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, the slave Januarij van
Tutocorijn, who, after this, his given confession, had been read out
word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist with it,
therefore having no desire that anything further be added to or taken
from it.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 4 September 1737 in the Dutch
language, which the confessant speaks and understands reasonably well,
before the honourables J.T. Rhenius and Jan de Wit, members from the
aforementioned honourable Council, who have properly signed the original
of this, together with the confessant and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretary.

TRANSLATION

*Dictum ter rolle*

Honourable Lord and Lords,

To prove this *dictum* with a few words, the *eijsscher* only produces
the verified confession of the defendant, from which it would come to
appear to your honours:

How in the evening, some days ago, the prisoner went, according to what
he says, to his owner’s house without being able to bring with him his
appointed *koeli geld*. Because he did not bring in this said money, he
was at once beaten miserably by his owner, the widow Van der Spuij, and
afterwards was sent out at once, without his meal, in order to find that
money. Yet, as he says, being so miserably beaten and starved, and
therefore incapable of looking for *coeli* \[*sic*\], he secretly
sneaked into the house of the burgher Nicolaas Cochelius during the
evening, stealing and eating there the bread that he found, and quietly
went upstairs to the attic and, covering himself with a blanket, lay
down to sleep, since he did not dare go home. However, surely because he
made a noise in the night and was discovered by the slaves of the house,
he was brought, on the order of the said burgher Cochelius, to the
prison at four o’clock in the morning, together with a blanket and some
old pillows which were lying by and on top of his body. And even though
this rogue now denies having stolen anything in the house, or having
sneaked into that house with wicked intent, and brings as excuse that he
gets lots of beatings and little to eat from his owner; this business is
nevertheless of many evil consequences – and is even more punishable in
this crook, as he has now been caught in this fashion at night for the
third time already, then in this one’s and then in that one’s house –
because nobody could be imagined sneaking like this into another man’s
house at night and remaining there, and it not being to an evil end,
namely to either steal, murder, or even to commit arson. Apart from
this, if the master of a house would find an unknown black *jongen* at
night in his house, he could, and totally in accordance with the law,
stab to death or shoot the same; above and beyond that, such a crook
could cause fatal trouble and disturbance to the woman and children in
houses where there is no man in the house. Therefore, a case which is
dangerous in every way and therefore punishable.

Now, whether the excuse of this *jongen* – namely that he was
continually being beaten by his owner when he did not produce his
appointed *koeli geld*, and besides got very little to eat – could give
rise to any remission, the *eijsscher* wants to leave solely to the
judgment of your honours, adding only to it that all of the *jongens*
who had been brought to prison of the said woman, sing the same
lamentations to the *eijsscher*; however, whatever the truth of that may
be, this crook is nevertheless punishable.

Which is why the *eijsscher*, to check all similar nightly visitations
and to prevent all accidents which could come as a result of it,
presumes with good reason to demand, as he does with this:

Demanding that the prisoner and defendant mentioned in the heading of
this, with certain judgment by your honours, be sentenced to be tied to
a stake, to be severely whipped by the *caffers*, and further to be
riveted in chains, in which to serve for nothing on the honourable
Company’s public works for a period of 18 successive months, with the
costs, or to any similar end as your honours deem fitting.[^4]

Exhibit in court, 12 September 1737.

\[signed\] D. van den Henghel.

[^1]: * Modern Tuticorin in South India. The VOC had a trading post
    there which was under the aegis of the Ceylon government. *

[^2]: * See 1718 Doulat van Balij, n. 5 on the *koeli geld* system.
    Maria van der Poel was the widow of Melt van der Spuij, one of the
    most important and successful alcohol *pachters* of the 1720s. She
    was therefore left quite well off, which puts her actions in this
    case in an interesting light. *

[^3]: * See 1736 Table Valley slaves, for his insistence on stricter
    controls over slaves in the town. There appears to have been a
    general scare in and around the town about illicit slave activities
    in the mid-1730s (see also 1735 Company slaves and 1737 Aron van
    Madagascar). Certainly the fiscal, Daniel van den Henghel, was
    particularly earnest about the need to assert tighter control over
    them. *

[^4]:  In fact Januarij was sentenced to be whipped by the *caffers* but
    then to be returned to his owner with costs, without having to work
    for the Company, CJ 19, ff. 119-20.
