1.  PIETER CORIDON

*A further example of the intensification of social control by the
authorities in late 1730s Cape Town is shown here. Two free blacks and
three slaves were found in the streets after 10 p.m., in contravention
of the law.[^1] Although they claimed they had only been drinking
a tot together after a fishing trip, they were whipped and sent home to
work in chains. The case gives a brief glimpse into social relations
between free blacks and slaves, part of Cape Town’s large underclass, as
well as the dangers that late-night socialising involved for them.*

**CJ 342** Criminele Process Stukken, 1738, ff. 1-2v.

Dictum ter rolle

Edelachtbare Heer en edele Heeren,

Den eijsser, op Saturdagmorgen, den 21^e^ der voorleden maand December,
kennis gekreegen hebbende van den wagthebbende officier der burgerij, de
heer Gijs. la Febre, als dat sijn corporaal, die de ronde aan de Caab
deet, tusschen den 20 en 21 der affgewekene maand December, des nagts de
klokke 11 uur, op ’s heeren wegen g’attrapeerd had, de gevangens en
gedaagdens in deesen, en dieselve, agtervolgens sijn order, in de tronk
heeft gebragt, op de eerst gedaagden en gevangen na, die uijt de handen
van den burgerwagt voor de deur van de tronk de vlugt nam, dog des
anderen daags wierd denselve door de dinaeren \[*sic*\] der justitie
wederom in hegtenis gebragt. Welke complottering en samenrotting des
nagts op ’s heeren wegen ten eenemaal niet veel goed belooft en alles
van seer quade gevolgen zijn, omdat door dat soort van volk op soo een
tijd niets te verwagten is dan schelmereijen, en door dien sulx bij ’t
generaal placcaat wel scherpelijk verboden word in ’t 82^ste^ articul,
welkers inhoud tot waarschouwinge luijd, namentlijk:

Werdende bij deese alle ’s Compagnies dienaeren, soo ambagtsgesellen,
als zoldaaten en mattroosen, alsmeede de bandiete en lijffeijgenen, soo
van ’s edele Compagnies dienaeren, als die der ingesetenen, wel
scherpelijk verboden: dat geene derselver hun voortaan sullen hebben te
verstouten om des nagts na de klokke tien uuren sig op ’s heeren
straeten off wegen te laeten vinden, op peene dat de vorengeciteerde ’s
edele Compagnies dienaeren daarop betrapt werdende, telkens in arrest
genomen en in een boete van twee maanden gagie *pro fisco* sullen
vervallen zijn, en daarenboven nog sonder de minste forme van proces
gelaarst te werden, zullende de lijffeijgenen en bandieten, sonder
aansien van wie deselve toebehooren, na opgemelde tijd op straat
bevonden werdende, dadelijk g’apprehendeert en na bevinding van saaken
arbitralijk gestraft werden, waarvan egter g’eximeert blijven de
sodanige die met hunne lijffmeesters, vrouwen, off derselver kinderen,
over straat gaan, off met wagens, ofte het een off ander van buijten
opkoomen off na derwaarts gaan; voorts sal een iegelijk die sijn slaaven
tot verrigting van ’t een ofte ander des nagts wil uijtsenden, een ligt
en lantaarntje tot teeken moete meede geeven, opdat passeeren mogen, en
opdat deese des te beeter g’observeert en nagekomen werd, soo werden de
dienaeren van de justitie, burger- en ratelwagts, ende een ijgelijk dees
ingesetenen gequalificeert, om de voorm. ’s edele Compagnies dienaaren,
slaaven, en bandieten, opgemeld, na ’t luijden der klok op straat
vindende, aan te houde en in arrest te brengen.

Waaromme den eijsser, tot weeringe van dusdanige complottereij,
vermeijnt te mogen en moeten concludeeren, als:

Concludeert dat alle vijf de gevangens en gedaagdens, door diffinitive
vonnisse van U Edel Achtbaerens, mogen werden gecondemneert: om door de
caffers te werden gelaarst, en voor de tijd van een jaar in de ketting
geklonken zijnde, en dusdanig na haarlieder huijsen gesonden te werden,
met de kosten, ofte tot alsulken fine als ’t U Edel Achtbaarens sullen
vinden te behooren.

*Exhibitum in judicio*, den 2^e^ Januarij 1738.

\[get.\] Js. Needer.

**CJ 20** Crimineele Regtsrolle des Casteels de Goede Hoop, 1738, ff.
1-3.

Donderdag, den 2^e^ Januarij 1738, present den edelachtbare heer
President, Hendrik Swellengrebel, en alle de leeden, assumptis de drie
burgerraden, d’ Edele Hendrik Oostwalt Eksteen, Henning Joachim Prehn en
Abraham Cloppenburg:

Den ondercoopman sieur Johannes Neder, als pro interim ’t Fiscaals ampt
waarnemende, *nomine officii*, eijscher,

contra:

De vrijswarten Pieter Coridon en Jan van Ceijlon, mitsgaders Jacob van
Bengalen, leijfeijgen van de weduwe Steven Viret, November van Ternaten
en Roman van Batavia, slaven van de vrijswartin Mami, alle vijf thans ’s
heeren gevangens en gedaagdens in cas van nagtcomplottering op ’s heeren
weegen.

Den eijscher concludeert als bij geschrifte.

De gedaagdens seggen dat zijlieden gevischt hebbende, sig des avonds om
ses uuren begeven hebben in eene schaggerij om aldaar, door dien nat
waaren, een soopje te drinken, en dat zijlieden uijtgaande, gevangen
sijn genomen geworden.

Den eijscher ’t gesegde der gedaagdens als insuffisant en leugenagtig
verwerp, ende persisteert bij eijsch en conculsie \[*sic*\] voor
replicq.

De gedaagdens versoeken om genade voor duplicq.

Den edelachtbaaren Raad, doende regt uijt naame ende van weegens de
hooghmoogende heeren Staaten Generaal der vrije Vereenigde Nederlanden,
condemneert alle vijf de gedaagdens: aan een paal dapper gelaerst en
vervolgens t’ huijs gesonden te werden, met condemnatie in de costen,
ontseggende den Raad den verderen eijsch van den Officier.

Naar dat de burgerraden weggegaan waaren sijn, op ’t versoek van
bovengenoemde sieur Johannes Needer, naar usu geconfisqueert geworden,
dertig rollen tabacq, op verscheijde tijden aangehaalt.

In ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, datum als voren.

Mij present, \[get.\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

# Dictum ter rolle

Honourable Lord and Lords,

On Saturday morning, the 21^st^ of the past month December, the
*eijsscher* was informed by the officer on guard of the *burgerwacht*,
the honourable Gijsb\[ert\] la Febre, that at eleven o’clock during the
night of the 20^th^ and 21^st^ of the past month December, the corporal
who was doing the rounds at the Cape had caught on their honours’ roads
the prisoners and defendants in this, and, upon his \[la Febre’s\] order
had taken them to prison, except for the first defendant and prisoner,
who had escaped from the hands of the *burgerwacht* before the door of
the prison, yet on the following day the same was once again brought
into custody by the servants of justice. Which plotting and ganging
together during the night on their honours’ roads certainly do not
promise anything good, being all of the most evil consequences, because
one cannot expect at such a time from that sort of people anything but
villainy, and also since this is expressly forbidden by the general
*plakkaat*, in the 82^nd^ article, the contents of which read as a
warning, namely:

With this it is expressly forbidden that any of the Company’s servants –
whether they are artisans’ apprentices, soldiers or sailors – as also
convicts and bondsmen – whether they are slaves of the honourable
Company or those of the inhabitants – should henceforth dare to be found
on their honours’ streets or roads after ten o’clock at night, on pain
of the following punishment: that when the aforesaid servants of the
noble Company are caught doing this, they are to be taken into arrest
each time and will incur a fine of two months’ wages *pro fisco* and, on
top of this, without even a court case, will be whipped; if the bondsmen
and convicts, irrespective of whom they belong to, are found on the
street after the said time, they will be apprehended instantly and,
according to the circumstances, be punished arbitrarily; from which,
however, are excluded those who are crossing the streets with their
masters, mistresses or the same’s children, or with wagons, or those who
came from the interior or are going in that direction. Further: each and
every one who wants to send his slaves out at night to do something or
the other must give them a light or small lantern as a sign so that they
may be allowed to pass and, in order that this be even better observed
and executed, the servants of justice, the *burgerwacht* and the
*ratelwacht*,[^2] and each and every one of these inhabitants, are
hereby called upon to detain and bring into arrest the aforementioned
servants of the honourable Company, slaves and bandits if they find them
on the street after the ringing of the bell.

Whereupon the *eijsscher*, to prevent such plotting, presumes to be
allowed and must conclude, viz.:

Concluding that all five the prisoners and defendants, with certain
conviction by your honours, may be sentenced: to be whipped by the
*caffers* and to be riveted in chains for the period of one year, and to
be sent to their homes thus, with the costs; or to such an end as your
honours would deem fitting.

Exhibit in court, 2 January 1738.

\[signed\] Js. Needer.

TRANSLATION

Thursday, 2 January 1738, present the honourable lord president Hendrik
Swellengrebel and all the members, with the three burgher councillors,
the honourables Hendrik Oostwalt Eksteen, Henning Joachim Prehn and
Abraham Cloppenburg, joining in.[^3]

The *onderkoopman* *Sieur* Johannes Neder, acting as fiscal for the
interim, in his official capacity as *eijsscher*,

contra:

The free blacks Pieter Coridon and Jan van Ceijlon, as also Jacob van
Bengalen, bondsman of the widow Steven Viret, November van Ternaten and
Roman van Batavia, slaves of the free black woman Mami,[^4] all five
currently their honours’ prisoners and defendants in the case of
plotting at night in their honours’ streets.

The *eijsscher* demands as in the document \[i.e. the *eijsch*\]

The defendants say that after they had been fishing, they went at six
o’clock that evening to a tavern to drink a tot there since they were
wet, and that when they were leaving, they were taken prisoner.

The *eijsscher* rejects the answer of the defendants as insufficient and
mendacious, and persists with his *eijsch ende conclusie* as rejoinder.

The defendants request mercy as rejoinder.

The honourable Council, practising justice in the name and on behalf of
the high and mighty Lords States General of the free United Netherlands,
sentences all five defendants to be thoroughly whipped at the stake and
then to be sent home, with sentencing to the costs; the Council denying
the further *eijsch* of the Officer.

After the burgher councillors have left, at the request of the
aforementioned *Sieur* Johannes Needer, thirty rolls of tobacco, which
have been seized at various times, were confiscated as per custom.

In the Castle of Good Hope, the date as before.

In my presence, \[signed\] Js. de Grandpreez, secretary.

[^1]: * The fiscal cites article 82 of the general *plakkaat* of 1727
    (*Kaapse Plakkaatboek *II: 126-27), but this case is equally about
    contravening article 51 of the same *plakkaat* (*Kaapse
    Plakkaatboek* II: 119), which prohibited ‘zamenrottinge’ or
    gatherings of slaves. See also 1736 Table Valley slaves, n. 2. *

[^2]:  The *ratelwacht *was the ‘watchmen’ and *burgherwacht* the ‘town
    militia’. There were two night watchmen who were under the command
    of the Burgher Council, and whose name stemmed from the rattles that
    they carried to sound alarms of fire or other dangers. The town
    *burgerwacht*, established in 1686, was made up of male burghers
    between the age of 16 and 60 who lived in and around the settlement.
    Each had to perform duty about once a month keeping order during the
    night, although this was often done through proxies, Botha 1962,
    vol. I: 161-63; *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* I: 220, 236-38 and 241-42, and
    Mentzel 1921: 66. For the *burgerwacht* in operation, see 1736 Table
    Valley slaves.

[^3]:  The Council of Justice was similar in its make-up to the Council
    of Policy, except that in court cases (both criminal and civil) in
    which burghers or slaves were tried, two ‘burgher councillors’
    joined the Council of Justice. These councillors were elected
    annually, and election conferred a great marker of status. In the
    1780s the number of burgher councillors was increased to six (De Wet
    1981: 180-83; Visagie 1969: 41-4).

[^4]:  On slave-ownership by free blacks, see 1785 Spadilje van Siam, n.
    2.
