1.  CUPIDO VAN MALLABAAR

*In this tragic case, Cupido van Mallabaar threatened to take his own
life, as well as that of his owner’s wife and her child.*^*[^1]*^* The
episode reveals an intense emotional crisis. Cupido’s complaints that he
was made to wear clothing that he was not used to, and that his owners
had bought neither other slaves to assist him, nor a female slave to be
his companion, reveal the frustrations and alienation of a slave on a
Drakenstein farm whose owners merely laughed at his grievances. His
ambivalent feelings towards his owners are shown by his vacillation
between pity for his mistress and her child and his threats to
them.*^*[^2]*^

*The case shows how hard it must have been for an imported slave to
adapt culturally to alien circumstances and gives a glimpse into the
ways in which he felt and responded to what he experienced at the Cape.
*

**CJ 786** Sententiën, 1736-1743, ff. 263-70.

Alsoo Cupido van Mallabaar, slaaf van den burger Jan van der Straeten,
oud naar gissing 28 jaaren, thans ’s heeren gevangen, buijten pijn ofte
dwang van banden, van ijsers, dan wel de minste bedreijging van dien,
vrijwillig heeft geconfesseert, en den edelagtbare Raad van Justitie
deeses gouvernements sonneklaer is gebleeken:

Dat den gevangen in de jongst gepasseerde maand Maart, sonder den
juijsten datum te kunnen opnoemen, op seekeren dag, nadat bereets drie à
vier maal uijt en in zijn meesters huijs, geleegen aan Draakensteijn,
gegaan was, ten laatsten eijndelijk weederom in huijs koomende, sig in
een caemer heeft begeeven, uijt dewelke den gevangen een snaphaen
beneevens een trommel met cruijt nam, waarop zijn gevangens lijfvrouw
sulx siende, die alleenig met haar kind te huijs was, hem gevangen
vroeg, waerom hij die snaphaan nam, en wat hij daer meede wilde
schieten, en hij gevangen daerop antwoordende: Ik wil u niet schieten
maar mij selfs, seijde zijn gevangens lijfvrouw: Laat dat dog in Godes
naam staan, en hij gevangen weederom: Neem gij jouw kind maar op. Dat
zijn gevangens lijfvrouw het kind opgenoomen, met hetselve hierop in het
voorhuijs is gegaan, en den gevangen de snaphaen weederom needer geset
hebbende, deselve is gevolgt, en in het voorhuijs koomende, onder het
seggen: Wat wil gij nu hebben, dat ik jouw of mij sal vermoorden?, het
mes uijt zijn sak gehaeld en voorts hetselve met de rug op zijn keel
heeft geset, vraegende of zijn gemelte lijfvrouw sien wilde dat hij
gevange hem de keel afsneed, waerop zijn gemelte lijfvrouw hem gevangen
te gemoed voerde, waarom hij sulx doen wilde, en of hem iets
mancqueerde, daar den gevangen op ten antwoord gaf: Soo veel, en den
gevangen, naar dat zijn camisool en hembd uijtgetrokken en op de grond
gegooijt hadde, wijsende op de leere broek, seijde: Ik ben in mijn land
niet gewend sulke broeken te draagen, ik heb ook al twee à drie jaaren
meede gewerkt, en sie niet dat de baas meerder jongens en nonje een
meijd voor mij koopt, baas en nonje konnen wel lachgen \[*sic*\] en
praaten, seggende den gevangen alstoen nog teegens zijne gemelte
lijfvrouw, dat hij op seekeren tijd in de caemer was gekoomen wijl haar
man te slaapen lag, met voorneemen om denselven te vermoorden, dog dat
hij hem aansiende, een inkeer hadde gekreegen, omdat hij gevangen over
zijn gemelte lijfvrouw en haar kind jammerde, naar hetwelke zijn
gevangens lijfvrouw buijten de deur gingh en hij gevangen haar volgende,
wees aan deselve vijf koogels, die hij uijt sijn sak haelde, onder het
seggen: Die koogels hebbe ik voor mij selfs gemaakt.

Dat hij gevangen hierop weederom naer de caemer is gegaan om de snaphaen
te haalen, soekende zijn gevangen lijfvrouw inmiddels met haar kind de
vlugt te neemen, dog den gevangen sulx merkende, is haar aanstonds
gevolgt met een bloot mes in de hand, haar belastende dat zij terug naar
huijs soude gaan, seggende wel te weeten wat haar voorneemen was, waarop
zijn gevangens lijfvrouw alsdoen ook naar huijs ging, alwaar hij
gevangen haar ordonneerde dat zij in de combuijs soude gaan, ’twelk zij
gedaan hebbende, heeft den gevangen tot twee reijsen toe met het bloote
mes na haar gestooken, welke steeken zijn gevangens lijfvrouw de eerste
maal met de regter-, en de tweede keer met de linker hand willende
afweeren, daar door aan beijde haare handen is gequest \[*sic*\]
geraekt, waerop hij gevangen het mes in zijn sak steekende, gemelte zijn
lijfvrouw bij het haar heeft gevat en naar de caemer gesleept, seggende:
Blijft daer met jouw kind en past dat op, gaande hij gevangen hierop
weederom uijt de caamer in het voorhuijs, alwaar hij de snaphaan nam die
als doen daar stond, hetwelk zijn gemelte lijfvrouw gewaar werdende,
quam met een beesemstok in het voorhuijs, seggende teegens hem gevangen:
Als gij die snaphaen niet laat staan, dan sal ik jouw met de beesemstok
slaan, daar hij gevangen op antwoorde: Sla maar; dog zijn gevangens
gemelte lijfvrouw een inkeer krijgende, ging van hem af en nam haar kind
op, als wanneer hij gevangen de kolf van de snaphaen teegens de muur en
de tromp teegens zijn borst settende, dog sonder deselve los te stooten,
weederom heeft needer geset, onder het seggen: Gij bent dog gequest, het
is beeter dat ik jou maar dood maek, want gij sult het dog aan baas
seggen; daar zijn gevangens lijfvrouw op repliceerde, dat sij sulx niet
seggen soude, maar wel dat brood willende snijden, haar selven in de
handen gesneeden hadde, waarop den gevangen antwoorde: Dat sult gij
doen; bepraetende zijn gevangens lijfvrouw hem eijndelijk om naar den
chirurgijn Schabort te gaan om een plijster en wat brandewijn voor haare
wonden, die sterk bloeden, te haalen, hem gevangen ten dien eijnde meede
geevende een leedige fles, met welke fles hij in een droog reviertje,
niet verre van het huijs, is gegaan, en van daar weeder terug koomende,
bragt hij gevangen een halve fles brandewijn meede, waar van hij iets op
de quetsueren van zijn gevangens lijfvrouw goot, en volgens zijn
gevangens seggen, soude hij die brandewijn van seekere jongen, Januarij
genaamt, toebehoorende den burger David Villier, bekoomen hebben.

Dat hij gevangen, na sulx verrigt te hebben, teegens sijn gemelte
lijfvrouw nog gesegt heeft: Het soude beeter weesen, dat ik jouw, jouw
man, en jouw kind vermoorde, en openvlekte als een vlek vis, en dan mij
ook; gaande voorts naar buijten om zijn waater af te slaan, welke
geleegentheijt zijn gevangens lijfvrouw waarneemende met haar kind de
vlugt nam, begeevende sig naer de plaats van den landbouwer David
Villier, siende zij, soo als een endweegs van huijs was, dat den
gevangen buijtens huijs in de bosjes na haer sogte, ook hoorde zij kort
daeraan naar de kant van haar huijs een schoot doen, en een wijnig
daarna sag sij een groote rook en damp van haar huijs opgaan, alle
hetwelke zij bij haare aankomst op de plaats van gemelte Villier heeft
bekent gemaakt, die sig ook aanstonds derwaerts heeft begeeven.

Dat den gevangen hierop weederom in huijs is gekoomen en zijn
meesteresse missende, sig naar buijten in de bosjes heeft begeeven om
haar op te soeken, dog deselve niet vindende, is hij gevangen weederom
in het huijs en in de caemer gegaan en, volgens zijn seggen, hem selfs
willende dood schieten, soude het kooij goed daar door in brand geraakt
zijn, hetwelk hij wilde uijtsleepen, dog door zijn dronkenschap te
onmagtig zijnde, is hij gevangen uijt het huijs gegaen en eenige buuren
siende aankoomen, heeft hij gevangen sig in een droog reviertje bij het
huijs begeeven en sig aldaar de keel soeken af te snijden, dog wierd,
terwijl hier meede nog beesig was, van de gemelte buuren aldaar gevangen
genoomen, en alsoo in handen van de justitie overgeleevert.

Ende gemerkt sulke ongehoorde gruwel daeden, in een land daar regt en
justitie geoeffent word, niet swaer genoeg kunnen werden gestraft.

Soo is het dat den edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses Casteels, ten
daege dienende, aandagtelijk hebbende geleesen en geresumeert den
schriftelijken crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie door den landdrost,
sieur Pieter Lourensz, *nomine officii*, op ende jeegens den gevangen
gedaen ende genoomen, wijders geleth op des gevangens vrijwillige
gerecolleerde confessie, en op alle hetgeen voorts ter saake dienende
was, doende regt uijt naame ende van weegens de hooghmoogende Heeren
Staaten Generaal der vrije Vereenigde Neederlanden, den gevangen Cupido
van Mallabaar hebben gecondemneert, gelijk haar Edel Agtbaarens
denselven condemneeren mits deesen: omme gebragt te werden ter plaatse
alwaar men alhier gewoon is crimineele sententiën te executeeren en
aldaar aan den scherprechter overgeleevert en op een kruijs gebonden
sijnde, van onder op, sonder slag van gratie, leevendig geleedebraekt te
werden, en dus op ’t kruijs te blijven leggen totdat den geest sal
hebben gegeeven, daar naer ’t doode lichaem naar ’t buijten geregt
gesleept en op een rad geset sijnde, daerop te blijven leggen totdat
door de lugt en voogelen des heemels zal zijn verteerd, condemneerende
den Raad weijders den gevangen in de costen en misen van justitie.

Aldus gedaen ende gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 28^e^
Maij 1739; mitsgaders gepronuntieert ende geëxecuteerd den 30^e^ dier
maand.

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] H. Swellengrebel.

\[get.\] R. Tulbagh, D. v.d. Henghel, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Js.
Möller, Mnus. Bergh, Corns. Eelders, P.R. de Savoije, Js. de Grandpreez,
Am. Decker, H.J. Prehn, Jan Hendrik Hop, G. la Febre.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] D.G. Carnspek, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Since Cupido van Mallabaar, slave of the burgher Jan van Straeten, 28
years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntarily
confessed without torture or force of bonds, of irons, or even the least
threat of suchlike, and since it has appeared as clear as daylight to
the honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That on a certain day during the recently passed month of March, without
being able to name the precise date, the prisoner, after he had already
gone in and out of his master’s house, situated in Draakensteijn, three
or four times, finally entered the house again and went to a room, from
which he took a musket and also a box with gunpowder. When the
prisoner’s mistress, who was alone at home with her child, saw this, she
asked him why he took the musket and what he wanted to shoot with it,
and when the prisoner replied to this: “I do not want to shoot you, but
myself”, his mistress said: “In God’s name, put it down”, while the
prisoner replied: “You just pick up your child”. That the prisoner’s
mistress then picked up her child and went with it to the *voorhuijs*.
The prisoner put down the musket, followed them and, when he got to the
*voorhuijs*, took his knife from his pocket, saying: “What do you want
now, that I should murder you, or myself?”, and then put the back of the
knife against his throat, asking if his said mistress wanted to see him
slitting his throat; upon which his mistress earnestly enquired why he
wanted to do this, and whether something was wrong with him, to which
the prisoner gave as answer: “So much”. And, after the prisoner took off
his jacket and shirt and threw them down on the ground, he said,
pointing to his leather trousers: “I am not used to wearing trousers
like these, I have already worked two or three years here, and I do not
see the *baas* buying more *jongens* or *nonje* buying a *meijd* for
me,^[^3]^ *baas* and *nonje* may talk and laugh very well”. The prisoner
at this time also told his said mistress that he once went into the room
while her husband was lying asleep with the intention to kill him but,
looking at him, the prisoner repented because he took pity on his
mistress and her child. After this, the prisoner’s mistress went outside
through the door, with the prisoner following her, and who then showed
her five bullets which he took from his pocket, saying: “These bullets I
have made for myself”.

That after this, when the prisoner again went to the room to collect the
musket, his mistress meanwhile sought to take flight with her child, but
that the prisoner noticed this and immediately followed her, with an
unsheathed knife in his hand, and ordered her to return to the house,
saying that he knew full well what her intention was. Whereupon the
prisoner’s mistress then went to the house, where the prisoner ordered
her to go into the kitchen, and when she had done this, the prisoner
stabbed at her at least twice with his unsheathed knife, which stabs the
prisoner’s mistress tried to prevent, the first time with her right and
the second time with her left hand, as a result of which she got injured
on both her hands. After this, the prisoner put the knife in his pocket,
took his mistress by her hair and dragged her to the room, saying: “Stay
there with your child and look after it”, upon which the prisoner again
went from the room into the *voorhuijs* where he picked up the musket
which was then standing there. When his said mistress noticed this, she
came into the *voorhuijs* with a broom handle and said to the prisoner:
“If you do not leave the musket, I will hit you with the broom handle”,
to which he answered: “Come on, hit me”, but that she came to her
senses, went from him and picked up her child. The prisoner then put the
butt-end of the musket against the wall and its muzzle against his
chest, but, without firing it, he put it down again, saying: “You are
after all wounded, it would be better if I simply kill you, as you will
only go and tell the *baas*”; to which the prisoner’s mistress replied
that she would not tell this, but rather that she had cut herself on her
hands when she tried to slice bread, to which the prisoner answered:
“You will do that”. The prisoner’s mistress finally talked him round to
go to the surgeon Schabort to fetch a plaster and some brandy for her
wounds which were bleeding strongly. To this end, she gave him an empty
bottle to take with him, with which bottle he went to a dry rivulet not
far from the house, and when he returned from there, the prisoner
brought with him half a bottle of brandy, of which he poured some onto
the wounds of his mistress. According to what the prisoner says, he had
obtained this brandy from a certain *jongen*, named Januarij, belonging
to the burgher David Villier.

That after he had done this, the prisoner also said to his mistress: “It
would be better if I murder you, your husband and your child, and that I
flay you open like flecked fish, and then do me as well”, after which he
went outside to pass water, which opportunity his mistress used to take
flight with her child, going to the farm of the farmer David Villier.
When she was some way from the house, she saw the prisoner looking for
her amongst the bushes outside the house and, shortly thereafter, also
heard to the side of her house a shot going off and, some time
thereafter, much smoke and fume going up from the house, all of which
she made known on her arrival at the farm of the said Villier, who
immediately set out there.

That when the prisoner returned to the house and found his mistress
missing, he went outside to search for her amongst the bushes, but when
he could not find her, he again went to the house and into the room in
order, according to what he says, to shoot himself, but through which
the bedding caught fire, which he wanted to drag out but, because of his
drunkenness, was unable to do so. The prisoner went outside the house
and, when he saw some of the neighbours coming, went to the dry rivulet
by the house and tried to cut his throat there, but was taken prisoner
while busy doing this by the said neighbours, and was thus delivered
into the hands of justice.

And since such unprecedented atrocities cannot be punished severely
enough in a country where law and justice are practised.

So it is, that the honourable Council of Justice of this government,
serving today, having seen and read with attention the written
*crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up for and delivered for and
against the prisoner by the landdrost, *Sieur* Pieter Lourensz, in his
official capacity, besides having noted the prisoner’s voluntary,
verified confession and everything else which further served the case,
practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty
Lords States General of the free United Netherlands and, having judged
the prisoner Cupido van Mallabaar, their honours are sentencing him with
this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually
executed here, there to be handed over to the executioner and to be tied
onto a cross, to be broken alive from the bottom up, without the *coup
de grâce*, to remain lying thus on the cross until he has given up the
ghost, thereafter the dead body to be dragged to the outer place of
execution, to be placed upon a wheel and to remain lying on this until
being consumed by the air and the birds of heaven; the Council further
sentences the prisoner to the costs and expenditure of justice.

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 28 May 1739, as
well as pronounced and executed on the 30^th\ ^of this month.^[^4]^

Let the execution be done, \[signed\] H. Swellengrebel.

\[signed\] R. Tulbagh, D. v.d. Henghel, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Js.
Möller, Mnus. Bergh, Corns. Eelders, P.R. de Savoije, Js. de Grandpreez,
Am. Decker, H.J. Prehn, Jan Hendrik Hop, G. la Febre.

In my presence, \[signed\] D.G. Carnspek, secretary.

[^1]: * The circumstances are somewhat similar to *amok* cases (see 1744
    Barkat van Timor for notes on this), although, unlike *amok*
    perpetrators, Cupido hesitated over his actions because of his
    conflicting emotions towards his owners. *

[^2]: * Other documentation in the case includes the *eijsch*, the
    *interrogatoriën* of Cupido van Mallabaar, and the testimony of
    Maria Klaasz, Jan van der Straten’s wife, CJ 344, ff. 302-20. Cupido
    admitted everything in his answers to the questions in his
    *interrogatoriën*, including his intention to murder his owner,
    stating that he had acted ‘het eene uijt dronkenschap en het andere
    uijt bangigheijt’ (partly because of drunkenness and partly through
    fear), CJ 344, f. 315v. *

[^3]:  According to Haafner, who lived at the Cape between 1767 and
    1770, it was very common in the Dutch colonies ‘dat men aan de
    huisslaven, ten einde hun het bezoeken van vreemde slavinnen te
    beletten en meer aan het huis van hunnen meester te verbinden, eene
    slavin uit het huis toevoegt, die met elkander zamenwonen en ook
    wederzijds vrij getrouw zijn, hetgene men dan zijne slaven
    uittrouwen noemt’ (that, in order to prevent other female slaves
    from visiting, and to attach their own slaves more to the house of
    their masters, one would give a female slave from the household to
    house slaves, who would live together, and who would also be fairly
    faithful to each other; which system is called marrying out one’s
    slaves) (Haafner 1992: 74). Not buying a female slave for Cupido
    obviously did not ‘attach’ him to the house of his owner.

[^4]:  Cupido’s admission of guilt and the sentence were recorded in the
    *regtsrollen*, CJ 21, ff. 44-6. This was one of the most severe and
    gruesome sentences that could be passed by the Council of Justice.
