1.  **ALEXANDER VAN COUCHIN**^**[^1]**^

*This is an unusual case, since the recommendation of the landdrost that
the accused slave be sentenced to death was overturned by the Council of
Justice.*^*[^2]*^* Alexander van Couchin was accused of threatening to
attack his owner, but he made no actual assault. Tensions were running
high on this Klapmuts farm and the case reveals the complex conflicts of
interest between the slave-owner who wants to whip one of his female
slaves, on the one hand, and his wife, one of his slaves and the
*knecht* working on the farm, on the other. It is not clear whether
Alexander was acquitted because the court had some sympathy with his
circumstances or because the evidence was unclear. It is striking that,
although rejecting the death sentence, the court did not impose any
punishment at all, but neither did it order him to be sold to prevent
his owner from retaliation, as was usually done in such cases.*^*[^3]*^*
*

**CJ 346** Criminele Process Stukken, 1741, ff. 115-16.

Relaas gegeeven, ter requisitie van den landdrost, sieur Pieter
Lourensz, door den oud heemraad Daniel van der Lith, zijnde hetselve van
deese volgende inhoud, als:

Dat hij relatant op den 18^e^ der gepasseerde maand Februarij, des
middags, seekere slavinne, Aurora genaamt, over presumptie van begaane
dieverije heeft willen laaten vast maaken, vooraff zijn relatants slave
jonge, genaamt Alexander, die bij voorseijde mijd Aurora hield,
voorsigtighijdshalven heeft doen vastbinden, dog aangesien zijn
relatants huijsvrouw daarover seer verschrikte, heeft hij relatant
gemelte Alexander weederom doen los maaken, laatende voorseijde mijd
Aurora, wijl die zijn relatants huijsvrouw om het lijff viel en om
genade smeekte, insgelijx gaan.

Dat des anderen daags morgens vroeg zijn relatants knegt, Christoffel
Jansz, hem berigt heeft dat van eenige slaaven verstaan hadde dat den
slaaf Alexander des voorigen daags, nadat weederom los gemaakt was, een
mes in de hand genoomen en daar meede soude gedrijgt hebben hem relatant
te dooden, laatende hij relatant dien slaaff Alexander, terwijl eenige
menschen bij sig hadden, solange vrij gaan tot Vrijdag, den 24 van even
gemelte maand Februarij, als wanneer hij relatant denselven heeft doen
vleugelen, en in den handen van den requirant heeft laaten overleeveren,
en voorts van het gepasseerde aan deselve kennisse gegeeven.

Anders niet relateerende, geeft den comparant^[^4]^ voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, met presentatie van dit, zijn gerelateerde,
ten allen tijden, sulx vereijscht werdende, nader te sullen gestand
doen.

Dat aldus passeerde ter justitieelen secretarije des Casteels de Goede
Hoop, den 5^e^ April 1741, ten overstaan van de clercquen Adriaan van
Schoor en Hendrik Emanuel Blanckenberg, als getuijgen, die de minute
deeses, beneevens den comparant, ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk
hebben onderteekent.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den oud heemraad
Daniel van der Lith dewelke dit, zijn gegeevene relaas, van woorde tot
woorde claar en duijdelijk voorgeleesen zijnde, verclaarde daar bij
volkoomen te persisteeren, oversulx niet begeerende datter iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal, en betuijgde, in presentie van
desselfs leijfeijgen, Alexander van Couchien, het boovenstaande de
suijvere waarheijd te zijn.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop den 6^e^ April 1741 voor d’
edele Cl. Brand en Jan de With, leeden uijt den edelagtbare Raad van
Justitie, voornoemt, die de minute deeses, beneevens den relatant ende
mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] D.G. Carnspek, secretaris.

**CJ 346** Criminele Process Stukken, 1741, ff. 121-22.

Huijden, den 13^e\ ^Maij 1741, compareerde voor mij, Arnold Schephausen,
secretaris van Stellenbosch en Draakensteijn, in ’t bijweesen van den
naartenoemene getuijgen, den soldaat Christoffel Jansz, thans als knegt
in leening sijnde bij den oud heemraad Daniël van der Lith, dewelke, ter
requisitie van den landdrost sieur Pieter Lourensz, verklaarde de
waarachtige waarheijd te zijn:

Dat hij comparant sig op seekeren Saturdagh, in de maand Februarij,
sonder egter den precisen datum te weeten, heeft bevonden op sijn
meesters plaats, geleegen omtrent de Klapmuts; dat gemelte sijn meester
hem alsdoen teegens den middagh, gelast heeft seekere slaaf van hem,
Alexander genaamt, vast te binden, sonder dat hem comparant bewust is om
wat voor reedenen.

Dat hij comparant dien jongen Alexander in de combuijs vast gebonden
hebbende, sig voorts naar sijn werck heeft begeeven, komende kort
daaraan bij hem comparant, bij het waagenhuijs (alwaar beesig was, een
waagen in te schuijven), een van sijn meesters slaven, genaamt Pieter,
dewelke teegens hem comparant seijde: ’t Is goed, dat ghij van over de
bergh gekomen bent, want die jonge wou de baas vermoorden; waarop hij
comparant repliceerde: Mijn God! dat moest niet geschieden, gaande
voorts weederom naar de combuijs, hoorende alsdoen dat sijn meester seer
hard teegens die jongen Alexander was spreekende, seggende hij comparant
voorts, soo dra in de combuijs quam, teegens dien jongen: Alexander! gaa
na jouw werk toe; waarop denselven antwoorde: Ik wil vandaage niet
werken, begeevende hij comparant sig voorts weeder naar sijn werck,
sonder dat hem comparant iets anders van deese zaak bekend is,
betuijgende voorts, niet gesien te hebben dat dien jongen Alexander een
mes gehad heeft.

Voorts verklaarde den comparant niets meer, geevende voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, met presentatie van dit, sijn gedeposeerde,
ten allen tijden, als sulx mogte werden vereijscht, met solmneelen eede
nader te bevestigen.

Dat aldus passeerde aan Stellenbosch, ten overstaan van den substituut
Jan Hendrik Narb en den geregtsboode Jan van Ellewe, als getuijgen van
geloove hiertoe versogt, die de minute deeses, beneevens den comparant
ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] A. Schephausen, secretaris.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den soldaat
Christoffel Jansz, denwelken deese zijne gegeven depositie van woorde
tot woorde claar en duijdelijk voorgelesen zijnde, verclaarde daarbij
volkomen te persisteeren, oversulx niet begerende datter iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal, en betuijgde in presentie van den
slaaf Alexander van Coutschien \[*sic*\] alle het bovenstaande de
suijvere waarhijd te zijn, en sprak, tot bekragtiging der waarhijd van
dien, de solemneelen woorden: Soo waarlijk, helpe mij, God almagtig.

Aldus gerecolleert ende beëedigt aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 18^e^ Maij
1741.

Dit X is het merk van den soldaat Cristoffel Jansz.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] Am. Decker, J. de Wit \[*sic*\].

Mij present, \[get.\] D.G. Carnspek, secretaris.

**CJ 346** Criminele Process Stukken, 1741, ff. 123-26.

Interrogatoriën, omme daarop, ter requisitie van den landdrost Pieter
Lourensz, gehoord en ondervraegt te werden den slaaf Alexander van
Couchin, lijfeijgen van den oud heemraad Daniel van der Lith.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den slaaf Alexander
van Couchin, dewelke op deese neevenstaande vraagpoincten sodanig heeft
gerespondeert als op dies margine staat aangetekent.

Articul 1: Hoe zijn gevangens naam, ouderdom en geboorteplaats is.

Antwoord: Alexander van Couchin, oud naar gissing 40 jaaren.

Articul 2: Wiens lijfeijgen hij gevangen, en waar alhier beschijden is
geweest?

Antwoord: Lijfeijgen van den oud heemraad Daniel van der Lith, en
gewoond te hebben op desselfs plaats, geleegen omtrent de Clapmuts.

Articul 3: Of hij gevangen op Saturdag den 18 der jongst gepasseerde
maand Februarij, des middags op zijn meesters plaats, geleegen omtrent
de Clapmuts, in de combuijs sittende te eeten, niet door den knegt
Christoffel op ordre van zijn voormelde meester is vast gebonden
geworden?  
Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 4: Of hij gevangen onder dat vastbinden een bloot mes, welk hij
in de hand hadde, in de sak heeft gestooken, en of hetselve daar niet
weederom door den slaaf Marinus is uijtgenoomen?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 5: Of de slavin Aurora insgelijx op ordre van zijn gevangens
meester vast gebonden sullende worden, desselfs lijfvrouwe om ’t lijf
gevloogen en om vergiffenis heeft versogt?  
Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 6: Of zijn gevangens lijfvrouwe, alsdoen seer ontsteld raakende,
zijn meester hem niet weederom heeft laaten los maaken?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 7: Of hij gevangen sig, naar dat los gemaakt was, niet naar het
slaavenhuijs heeft begeeven en naar dat aldaar een baatje hadde
aangetrocken, met een bloot mes in zijn broeksak weederom terug in de
combuijs is gegaan?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 8: Waar hij gevangen dat mes heeft bekoomen, en met wat intentie
hij gevangen met hetselve weederom naar de combuijs is gekeert?  
Antwoord: Ik hebbe mijn oud mes in het jongenshuijs op de vensterbank
gevonden, en ben daarmeede in de hand neevens een stuk tobak gegaan naar
de combuijs om hetselve aldaar te kerven.

Articul 9: Of het niet is geweest om daer meede zijn meester, dan wel
imand \[*sic*\] anders te vermoorden?

Antwoord: Ik hebbe het in mijne gedagtens niet gehad.

Articul 10: Of wanneer hij gevangen uijt het slaavenhuijs naar de
combuijs wilde gaan, den slaaf Marinus hem gevangen niet heeft willen
teegen houden, en of hij gevangen egter niet, onder ’t seggen: Wat hebt
jullij met mij te doen, laat mij maar gaan, naar de combuijs is gegaan?

Antwoord: De oude jonge Pieter heeft mij willen teegen houden, en hebbe
alsdoen teegens denselven gesegt: Ik ben moede, gaat gij maar naar jouw
werk toe, ik zal nu niet koomen.

Articul 11: Of wanneer hij gevangen in de combuijs was gekoomen, zijn
meester niet teegens hem heeft gesegt: Gae na jouw kooij en slaapt, gij
komt immers van de Caab en zijt moede en of hij gevangen daar niet
weederom op g’antwoord heeft: Dat wil ik niet doen?

Antwoord: Mijn baas heeft mij belast, terwijl ik dog niet slaepen wilde,
dat ik een mantje met persiken van juffrouw Cloeten soude gaan halen,
waerop ik g’antwoord heb van: Ja, baas, dat is goed; zijnde sulx
geschied in presentie van den slaaf van den heemraad Cloete, Isacq
genaamt.

Articul 12: Of hij gevangen, naar dat zijn meester hem ten tweeden maale
hadde gesegt, dat naar de kooij gaan soude, niet weeder gesegt heeft:
Dat wil ik niet doen, en vervolgens op een kist in de combuijs is gaan
sitten?

Antwoord: Daar weet ik niet van.

Articul 13: Of hij gevangen geduurende het spreeken met zijn meester
niet steets naar zijn meester is geavanceert?

Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 14: Of hij gevangen sulx niet heeft gedaan om met het, bij sig
hebbende, mes denselven te grieven?

Antwoord: Neen, dat hebbe ik niet gedaan.

Articul 15: Of hij gevangen, kort naar dat de eerste maal uijt de
combuijs was gegaan, niet aanstonds met een mes in de hand weederom in
de combuijs is terug gekoomen?

Antwoord: Ja, met het oude mes en ’t endje tobak.

Articul 16: Of hij gevangen, naar het mes op de drumpel van de combuijs
gesleepen hadde, niet heeft gesegt: Ja mes, gij sult in mijn ziel
steeken, of in een ander ziel?

Antwoord: Ja, dat hebbe ik door mismoedigheijt gesegt.

Articul 17: Of alsdoen de meijd Silvia teegens hem gevangen niet gesegt
heeft: Fouij \[*sic*\] jonge, schaamt uw wat, als dat eens ijmand te
hooren kreeg, sou jij na den duijvel weesen.

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 18: Of hij gevangen dien meijd daarop niet ten antwoord heeft
gegeeven: Dat raakt jouw niet, ik soek mijn dood, laat ik maar dood
weesen?

Antwoord: Het kan wel weesen, maar ik soude het niet vast kunnen seggen.

Articul 19: Of hij gevangen ’t mes weederom in de sak gestooken
hebbende, niet naar het slaavenhuijs is gegaan, en kort daar aan
weederom terug gekoomen?  
Antwoord: Ik hebbe het mes in de combuijs neergelegt en ben vervolgens
met den slaaf Isacq van Jacob Cloeten naar zijn meesters huijs gegaan om
persiken te haalen.

Articul 20: Wat hij gevangen telkens met dat mes in de combuijs heeft
willen doen ofte uijtvoeren?

Antwoord: Ik hebbe met dat mes een stuk tobak willen kerven.

Articul 21: Om wat reedenen hij gevangen sig soodanig teegens zijn
meester heeft g’opposeert, en waarom denselven heeft willen quetsen?

Antwoord: Ik ben niet quaad om mijn singeur \[*sic*\] geweest, en hebbe
hem ook niet willen quetsen.

Articul 22: Of hij gevangen niet moet bekennen dat over zijne
boosaardigheijt en gruwelijk voorneemen ten hoogsten strafbaar is?

Antwoord: Ik ben niet boosaardig teegens mijn meester geweest, ook hebbe
geen quaad voorneemen teegens denselven gehad.

Aldus gevraagt ende b’antwoord aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 6^e\ ^April
1741, voor d’ edele Cl. Brand en Jan de Wit, leeden uijt voormelde Raad,
die de minute deeses, beneevens den g’interrogeerden ende mij,
secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den slaaf Alexander
van Couchin, dewelke deese boovenstaande vraagen met zijne daarop
gegeevene antwoorden van woorde tot woorde klaar ende duijdelijk
voorgeleesen zijnde, verclaarde daar bij volkoomen te persisteeren,
oversulx niet begeerende datter iets meer bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan
werden zal, als eenelijk dat wanneer volgens ordre van zijn meester, soo
als op articuls 11 en 19 komt te seggen, een mantje met persiken gehaalt
heeft, hetselve niet bij juffrouw Cloete maar wel uijt zijn baas eijgen
thuijn geplukt en aan den jonge van gemelte Cloete, Isacq genaamt, heeft
overhandigt, en betuijgde alle het bovenstaande de suijvere waarheijt te
zijn.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 7^e\ ^April 1741, voor d’
edele C. Brand en Jan de Wit, leeden uijt meergemelte Raad, die de
minute deeses beneevens den g’interrogeerden ende mij, secretaris, meede
behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] D.G. Carnspek, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement given on the requisition of the landdrost, *Sieur* Pieter
Lourensz, by the former *heemraad* Daniel van der Lith, the same being
of the following contents, namely:

That on the afternoon of the 18^th^ of the past month February, when the
testifier wanted to tie up a certain slave named Aurora on the suspicion
of having committed theft, he first of all had his slave *jongen* named
Alexander, who has a relationship with the aforesaid *meijd* Aurora,
tied up as a cautionary measure. However, as the testifier’s wife was
appalled by this, the testifier had Alexander untied again, likewise
allowing the aforesaid *meijd* Aurora to go as she had seized his wife
around her waist and had begged for mercy.

That early in the morning of the following day, the testifier’s
*knecht*, Christoffel Jansz, informed him that he had understood from
certain slaves that on the previous day, after the slave Alexander was
untied again, he had taken a knife in his hand and apparently threatened
to kill the testifier with it. Since the testifier had some people
\[i.e. visitors\] with him, he allowed this slave Alexander to go free
in the meantime, until Friday, the 14^th^ of the said month February,
which is when the testifier had the same trussed and had him delivered
into the hands of the petitioner and then also informed him of what had
happened.

There being nothing more to relate, the deponent^[^5]^ asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, while
offering to subsequently confirm this, his statement, at any time, if so
required.

Thus recorded at the office of the secretary of justice at the Cape of
Good Hope on 5 April 1741 in the presence of the clerks Adriaan van
Schoor and Hendrik Emanuel Blanckenberg, as witnesses, who have properly
signed the original of this, together with the deponent and me, the
secretary.

Verification

There appears before us the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the former *heemraad* Daniel van
der Lith who, after this, his statement given, had been read out word by
word, plainly and clearly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore
not desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it, and
testifies in the presence of his bondsman, Alexander van Couchien, the
above to be the whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 6 April 1741 before the
honourables Cl. Brand and Jan de With, members from the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed the
original of this, together with the testifier and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] D.G. Carnspek, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Today, 13 May 1741, there appears before me, Arnold Schephausen,
secretary of Stellenbosch and Drakenstein, in the presence of the
witnesses named below, the soldier Christoffel Jansz, currently on loan
as *knecht* to the former *heemraad*, Daniel van der Lith, who on the
requisition of the landdrost, *Sieur* Pieter Lourensz, declares to be
the certain truth:

That on a certain Saturday in the month February, without however
knowing the exact date, the deponent was on his master’s farm, situated
around Klapmuts, when his master ordered him around midday to tie up a
certain slave of his, named Alexander, without the deponent being aware
of the reasons.

That the deponent tied up this *jongen* Alexander in the kitchen, and
then went to his work. Shortly thereafter there came to him in the
wagon-house (where he was busy putting together a wagon) one of his
master’s slaves, named Pieter, who said to the deponent: “It is good
that you have come from over the mountain,^[^6]^ because that *jongen*
wanted to have killed the *baas*”, to which the deponent replied: “My
God! That must not be”, after which he again went to the kitchen, where
he heard his master speaking very loudly to this *jongen* Alexander.
Further, as soon as the deponent came into the kitchen, he said to this
*jongen*: “Alexander, go to your work”, to which the same answered: “I
don’t want to work today”, after which the deponent again went to his
work, without anything else concerning this matter being known to him,
declaring besides that he did not see that this *jongen* Alexander had
had a knife.

There being nothing more to declare, the deponent asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, while
offering to subsequently confirm this, his deposition, at any time, if
this may be required.

Which I declare, \[signed\] A. Schephausen, secretary.

Verification  

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the soldier Christoffel Jansz,
who, after this, his given deposition, had been read out word for word,
clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore not
desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it, and testifies
in the presence of the slave Alexander van Coutschien all of the above
to be the whole truth, and uttered, as confirmation of the truth of
this, the solemn words: “Truly so, help me, Almighty God”.

Thus verified and confirmed at the Cape of Good Hope on 18 May 1741.

This X is the mark of the soldier Christoffel Jansz.

As delegates, \[signed\] Am. Decker, J. de Wit \[*sic*\].

In my presence, \[signed\] D.G. Carnspek, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Interrogation, in which is to be heard and questioned, on the
requisition of the landdrost Pieter Lourensz, the slave Alexander van
Couchin, bondsman of the former *heemraad*, Daniel van der Lith.

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave Alexander van Couchin,
who responded to the questions below as are noted in their margins.

Article 1: What is the prisoner’s name, age and place of birth?

Answer: Alexander van Couchin, 40 years old at a guess.

Article 2: Whose bondsman the prisoner is and where he was stationed
here?

Answer: Bondsman of the former *heemraad* Daniel van der Lith and to
have lived on his farm situated around Clapmuts.

Article 3: If, on the afternoon of Saturday the 18^th^ of the recently
past month February, when the prisoner was sitting and eating in the
kitchen on his owner’s farm situated around Clapmuts, he was tied up by
the *knecht* Christoffel on the order of his aforementioned master?

Answer: Yes.

Article 4: If, during this tying up, the prisoner had put an unsheathed
knife, which he had held in his hand, in his pocket, and if the same had
been taken out again from there by the slave Marinus?

Answer: Yes.

Article 5: If, when the slave Aurora, likewise on the order of the
prisoner’s master, was going to be tied up, she had seized her mistress
around her waist and begged for forgiveness?

Answer: Yes.

Article 6: If, as the prisoner’s mistress then became very upset, his
master had him untied again?

Answer: Yes.

Article 7: If the prisoner, after he had been untied, went to the slave
house,^[^7]^ put on a jacket there, and again went back to the kitchen
with the unsheathed knife in the pocket of his trousers?

Answer: Yes.

Article 8: Where the prisoner had found that knife and with what
intention he again returned with it to the kitchen?

Answer: I found my old knife on the window sill in the *jongens* house
and, with this and a piece of tobacco in my hand, went to the kitchen to
cut it there.

Article 9: If it had been to kill his master, or somebody else, with it?

Answer: I did not have this in mind.

Article 10: If, when the prisoner wanted to leave the slave house to go
to the kitchen, he had been held back by the slave Marinus, but that the
prisoner nonetheless, while saying: “What do you have to do with me,
just let me go”, went to the kitchen?

Answer: The old *jongen* Pieter wanted to keep me back, and I said to
him then: “I am tired, you just go on to your work, I won’t be coming
now”.

Article 11: If, when the prisoner got into the kitchen, his master told
him: “Go to your bed and sleep, you have after all come from the Cape
and are tired”, and if the prisoner answered to this: “I don’t want to
do that”?

Answer: My *baas* ordered me, since I did not want to sleep, to go and
fetch a basket with peaches from *juffrouw* Cloeten, to which I
answered: “Yes, *baas*, that is good”, and this was done in the presence
of the slave of the *heemraad* Cloete, named Isacq.

Article 12: If the prisoner, after his master told him a second time
that he should go to bed, again said: “I don’t want to do that” and then
went to sit on a chest in the kitchen?

Answer: I know nothing of this.

Article 13: If the prisoner, while speaking to his master, continually
advanced towards his master?

Answer: No.

Article 14: If the prisoner did this in order to pierce the same with
the knife he had with him?

Answer: No, I did not do that.

Article 15: If the prisoner, shortly after he had left the kitchen for
the first time, immediately returned again to the kitchen with a knife
in his hand?

Answer: Yes, with the old knife and a bit of tobacco.

Article 16: If the prisoner, after he had sharpened the knife on the
threshold of the kitchen, said: “Yes knife, you will stab into my soul,
or into another soul”?

Answer: Yes, I said that because of being disheartened.

Article 17: If the *meijd* Silvia then said to the prisoner: “Fie,
*jongen*, shame upon you, if somebody gets to hear that, you’ll be
damned”?

Answer: Yes.

Article 18: If the prisoner then gave this *meijd* as an answer to this:
“That has nothing to do with you, I want my death, just let me be dead”.

Answer: It could well be, but I would not be able to say that for sure.

Article 19: If, after the prisoner again put the knife in his pocket, he
went to the slave house and shortly thereafter returned yet again?

Answer: I put the knife down in the kitchen and thereafter went with the
slave Isacq of Jacob Cloeten to his master’s house in order to fetch
peaches.

Article 20: What the prisoner wanted to do or execute on each occasion
in the kitchen with that knife?

Answer: I wanted to cut a piece of tobacco with that knife.

Article 21: For what reasons the prisoner opposed his master in such a
fashion and why he wanted to wound the same?  
Answer: I was not angry with my *sinjeur* and I also did not want to
wound him.

Article 22: If the prisoner must not admit that he is punishable in the
extreme for his maliciousness and atrocious intention?

Answer: I was not malicious towards my master, also I did not have any
evil intention against the same.

Thus questioned and answered at the Cape of Good Hope on 6 April 1741
before the honourables Cl. Brand and Jan de Wit, members from the
aforementioned Council, who have properly signed the original of this,
together with the interrogatee and me, the secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave Alexander van Couchin,
who, after the above questions with the answers he had given to them,
had been read out word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully
persist by them, therefore not desiring that anything more be added to
or taken from it, except only that when he, on the order of his master,
as he answered on articles 11 and 19, went to fetch a basket of peaches,
he did not get it from *juffrouw* Cloete, but in fact picked them from
the very garden of his *baas* and handed them over to the *jongen* of
the said Cloete, named Isacq, and testifies all of the above to be the
whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 7 April 1741 before the
honourables C. Brand and Jan de Wit, members from the aforementioned
Council, who have properly signed the original of this, together with
the interrogatee and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] D.G. Carnspek, secretary.

[^1]: ** Cochin on the Malabar coast. In another case in which he
    appeared as a witness in 1746, he is named Alexander van Mallebaar,
    an indication of the variability of slave toponyms, 1/STB 3/8, 24
    January 1746.**

[^2]: * The landrost called for the death sentence by hanging, on the
    grounds that the Statutes of the Indies mandated death for all
    slaves who laid hands on their owners. He recognised that Alexander
    had not actually attacked his master, but pointed out that he had
    threatened to do so with a knife, being a ‘verwoedenend mensch’
    (enraged person) and that such ‘booswigten’ (villains) were
    widespread in the colony and could not be tolerated, CJ 346, ff.
    112v-13.*

[^3]: * The court decided after perusing the evidence that Alexander be
    freed and returned to his owner, but gave no reasons, CJ 23, ff.
    38-9. The documentation included the material transcribed here, as
    well as the evidence of three of the other slaves on the farm,
    Silvia van Madagascar, Pieter van de Cust Coromandel and Isaac van
    de Cust Coromandel, CJ 346, ff. 117-28. Alexander was still on the
    farm in 1746 when he gave testimony in another case on Daniel van
    der Lith’s farm concerning the maltreatment of the Khoi worker Claas
    by another *knecht*, Christoffel Esterhuijsen Willemsz, 1/STB 3/8,
    24 January 1746. *

[^4]:  Sic. Should be *relatant*.

[^5]:  *Sic*. Should be ‘testifier’.

[^6]:  The reference here is unclear. Perhaps Jansz had been stationed
    on one of his employer’s other properties, possibly in the Overberg
    region.

[^7]:  On separate sleeping quarters for slaves, see 1745 Cupido van
    Bengalen, n. 1.
