1744 CLAAS VAN BENGALEN

*Claas van Bengalen and Augustus van Malabar*^*[^1]*^* both worked on
the same farm and regularly fought each other over the female slave
Aurora, to the extent that their owner’s wife, Anna Marais, had been
forced out of the house*^*[^2]*^*. In this episode, the rivalry took a
ritualised as well as literal form. It was also surrounded with racial
and sexual slurs by both Anna Marais and Claas van Bengalen, revealing
the complexity of tensions that could arise when slaves (from different
regions and of both sexes), a free black and a farmer’s wife lived in
close and tense proximity.*^*[^3]*^* *

*It is noteworthy that Claas was punished by the Council of Justice
primarily for his threats to his owner’s wife rather than for planning
to escape.*^*[^4]*^

**1/STB 3/9** Criminele Verklaringen, 1740-1746, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeeven, ter requisitie van den landdrost, sieur Pieter
Lourensz, door Januarij van Rio de la Goa, oud naar gissing 20 jaaren,
lijfeijgen van den burger Francois Retief, sijnde van den volgenden
inhoud, namentlijk:

Dat op Woensdag avond, den 14^e\ ^deeser, hij relatant, beneevens sijn
meede slaaven Claas en Augustus, hun op de plaats van haaren lijfheer,
geleegen omtrent de Wagenmaakers Valleij, in de combuijs van het
woonhuijs bevindende, haar meester uijt het voorhuijs heeft geroepen:
Roept daar de honden eens toe, waarop voormelten slaaf Claas naar
buijten riep: ’t sa! ’t sa!, daar sijn relatants lijfvrouwe op vroeg:
Wie roept daar tsa! tsa!?, daar door den slaaf Augustus op geantwoord
wierd, dat het den slaaf Claas was die geroepen hadde, seggende sijn
relatants lijfvrouwe daar weeder op: Kan die mooije aap niet beeter
roepen?

Dat des anderen daags, ’s morgens vroeg, voormelten slaaf Augustus, aan
meergemelten slaaf Claas op het erweten land heeft verhaalt dat sijn
lijfvrouwe gesegd hadde, dat hij Claas een mooije aap was, en of
denselven niet anders roepen konde, waarop gemelten Claas repliceerde:
Al ben ik een mooije aap, als ik voor hem krijgen kan, sal ik dog met
hem samen slaapen.^[^5]^

Dat hij relatant met sijn twee voormelten meede slaaven, des ’s morgens
te acht uuren, in de combuijs gegeeten hebbende, in ’t weggaan den slaaf
Augustus, teegens een slavin van sijn relatants meester, genaamt Aurora,
seijde: Jij moet dat lammetje, ’twelk de wolf in de kraal doot gemaakt
heeft, slagten; daar den slaaf Claas op antwoorde: Wat weet de meijd van
slagten? Laat de baas de meijd commandeeren en jij niet; repliceerende
Augustus daarop: Kan zij dat lammetje niet slagten, schelmstukken kan
zij wel doen; begeevende hun weederom met hen driën op het erwetenland
om deselve te plucken, werdende den slaaf Augustus door sijns relatants
meester belast te gaan sien of sijn paard nog voeder hadde; seggende den
slaaf Claas teegens hem relatant, wanneer omtrent ’t erweten land waren:
Ik sal niet stil swijgen soo lange ik Augustus sijn bloed niet en suijg;
’twelke door den slaaf Augustus, die dichte \[*sic*\] bij haar gekomen
was, gehoort weesende, seijde denselven teegens voormelten slaaf Claas:
Ik wil reijs sien wat voor een keerel mijn bloed sal suijgen; gaande
voorts aan haarlieder werk, rijdende kort daaraan hun meester van daar
naar Stellenbosch, neemende den slaaf Augustus, kort nadat hun lijfheer
weggereeden was, een dik stuk hout, ’twelk dichte bij de erweten stond,
breekende ’tselve in twee stukken, werpende hetselve voor hem needer,
vraagende hij relatant alsdoen: Wat met dat hout doen wilde; daar hij
Augustus op antwoorde: Ik wil thuijn maaken; dog hij relatant siende dat
Augustus, soo als voort ging om de erweten te plukken, telkens die
houten op nam en voor sig needer smeet, vraagde hem weederom: Wat daar
meede wilde doen? Daar denselven op antwoorde: Jij weet niet, jonge, wat
ik met dat hout doen sal; seggende, omtrent een kleijn uur na dato,
teegens den slaaf Claas: Wat voor keerel heeft gesegd dat hij mijn bloed
suijgen woude? Laat hij nu komen; vraagende den slaaf Claas alsdoen: Wil
jij dat hebben?; daar Augustus op antwoorde: Jij hebt gesegd dat jij
mijn bloed wilt suijgen, kom nu maar aan; waarop den slaaf Claas
voormelten Augustus heeft aangegreepen, willende denselven in sijn wang
bijten, waarop Augustus den slaaf Claas wegstootende, hem met een kluijt
teegens de kop heeft geworpen, neemende tegelijk een van de twee stokken
in de hand, geevende daarmeede aan Claas een slag op het hoofd en een op
de rug, die daarop gemelten Augustus aangreep, en met denselven aan ’t
worstelen raakte, totdat Augustus los gekomen weesende, sig naar huijs
heeft begeeven. Gaande den slaaf Claas insgelijx naar huijs, werdende
door hem relatant derwaarts gevolgt, sittende sijn relatants lijfvrouwe
met den vrijswart, Sinopaaij genaamt, ter dier tijd aan taafel om te
eeten.

Dat gemelten slaaf Claas sig in de combuijs stil houdende, geseijde
slaaf Augustus teegens denselven gesegd heeft: Jij moet nu niet stil
swijgen, jij moet seggen dat wij gebakkeleijt^[^6]^ hebben; waarop sijn
relatants lijfvrouwe, in de combuijs komende, seijde: Wat doe jijluij
hier in huijs? Scheer jouw maar hiervandaan, jij legt altijd over de
oude teef te bakkleijen \[*sic*\]. Ik moet om jouwluij uijt mijn eijgen
huijs weggaan, hadde ik dat geweeten, dat het soo een teef was, ik soude
haar niet gekogt hebben; scheldende den slaaf Augustus den slaaf Claas
geduurig uijt, seggende: Hij wil bij nonje slaapen; waarop sijn
relatants lijfvrouwe den slaaf Augustus vroeg, wat hij seijde? Daar
denselven op antwoorde: Claas heeft gesegd, dat hij bij Nonje wil
slaapen; waarop sijn relatants lijfvrouwe, haar omwendende, in ’t
voorhuijs op een stoel is gaan sitten weenen; grijpende den slaaf Claas
alsdoen voormelten Augustus, die een bijl in de hand hadde, aan,
trekkende denselven buijten de combuijsdeur, alwaar zij met hun beijden
weeder aan ’t bakkeleijen raakten, komende sijn relatants lijfvrouwe
alsdoen bij de combuijsdeur staan, seggende teegens den slaaf Claas: Gaa
jij maar naar jouw werk, Augustus sal wel agteraan komen; gaande
denselven alsdoen ook met hem relatant weeder naar het land, siende sij
met hun beijden kort daaraan, dat haare lijfvrouwe met voormelten
Sinopaaij op het pad was naar de Drie Fonteijnen, seggende den slaaf
Claas alsdoen teegens hem relatant: Kom, jij moet met mijn meede
wegloopen, het sal anders met jouw niet goed afloopen, daar hij relatant
op antwoorde: Neen, ik wil niet wegloopen; begeevende sig den slaaf
Claas alsdoen weederom naar huijs om gemelten slaaf Augustus op te
soeken, onder ’t seggen: Nu ik dat gesegd hebbe, dat ik bij de nonje wil
slaapen, ben ik soo goed als doot, ik sal die jonge nog wel knippen,
loopende hij relatant vervolgens naar sijn lijfvrouwe, aan dewelke hij
hetselve op het pad berichte, die hem relatant daarop aan den burger Jan
van de Vijver, denwelken niet verre van daar op het pad was, sond en
liet versoeken den slaaf Claas gevangen te neemen en naar Stellenbosch
te brengen, die den meergemelten slaaf Claas ook, in een sloot dichte
bij zijn meesters woonhuijs, heeft gevangen genomen en van daar naar
Stellenbosch gebragt.

Laatstelijk betuijgt den relatant nog dat den slaaf Claas en Augustus
altoos ruusie \[*sic*\] en krakeel over voormelten meijd Aurora gehad
hebben.

Anders niet relateerende, geeft den relatant voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, bereijd sijnde het voorenstaande ten allen
tijden, wanneer sulx mogte vereijscht werden, nader te sullen gestand
doen.

Aldus gerelateert aan Stellenbosch op den 29^e\ ^October 1744, ten
overstaan van den boode Jan van Ellewe en den soldaat Arend Wilkens, als
getuijgen hiertoe versogt.

Dit merk X heeft den slaaf Januarij van Rio de la Goa eijgenhandig
gestelt.

Als getuijgen, \[get.\] J. van Ellewe, Arend Wilckens \[*sic*\].

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] A. Schephausen, secretaris.

**1/STB 3/9** Criminele Verklaringen, 1740-1746, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeeven, ter requisitie van den landdrost, sieur Pieter
Lourensz, door Anna Marais, huijsvrouw van den burger Francois Retief,
sijnde van den volgenden inhoud, namentlijk:

Dat op Donderdag, den 14^e\ ^deeser, sij relatante met den vrijswart,
Sinopaaij genaamt, in ’t voorhuijs van haar woonhuijs op haar plaats,
geleegen omtrent de Waagenmaakers Valleij, des ’smiddags sittende te
eeten, zijnde haar relatantes man omtrent een uur bevoorens van daar
naar Stellenbosch gereeden, buijten het huijs hoorende schreeuwen, van
de taafel is opgestaan en, over de onderdeur siende, ontwaarde dat haar
lijfeijgenen, genaamt Claas en Augustus, omtrent het erwetenland met
malkanderen bakkelaaijden, en dat den slaaf Augustus sig los gerukt
hebbende, naar huijs quam loopen, werdende gevolgt door den slaaf Claas,
komende beijde kort daaraan in de combuijs, siende zij relatante alsdoen
dat beijde die slaven bebloet waren en dat den slaaf Augustus een bijl
in de hand nam, en dat voormelten slaaf Claas een stok bij sig hadde,
waarop zij relatante naar de combuijsdeur gaande, teegens deselve
seijde: Wat doe jijluij hier in huijs? Scheer jouw maar hiervandaan, jij
legt altijd over die oude teef te bakkelaaijen, ik moet om jouwluij uijt
mijn eijgen huijs weggaan, hadde ik dat geweeten, dat het soo een teef
was, ik soude haar niet gekoft \[*sic*\] hebben; scheldende den slaaf
Augustus en Claas malkander en ondertusschen over ende weeder, seggende
gemelten Augustus tegen haar relatante: Weet nonje wel wat Claas gesegd
heeft? Hij seijd al was hij swart, als hij nonje krijgen kon, soude hij
wel bij Nonje slaapen; waarop zij relatante op een stoel in ’t voorhuijs
is gaan sitten, trekkende den slaaf Claas kort daaraan den slaaf
Augustus buijten de combuijs, waarnaar zij relatante aan den slaaf Claas
belaste, dat naar zijn werk op het land soude gaan, met bijvoeginge, dat
den slaaf Augustus wel na komen soude, begeevende den slaaf Claas
alsdoen ook met een slaaf van haar relatante, genaamt Januarij, hem
weeder naar het land, gaande zij relatante vervolgens, naar den slaaf
Augustus weggesonden hadde naar haar oom, den burger Steeven du Toit, om
denselven te versoeken dat wilde overkomen, met den vrijswart Sinopaaij
uijt haar huijs naar de Drie Fonteijnen.

Dat zij relatante op het pad niet verre van haar huijs weesende, bij
haar gekomen is, haar lijfeijgen Januarij van Rio de la Goa, denwelken
haar berichte dat den slaaf Claas naar huijs was gegaan om Augustus te
soeken, siende zij ter dier tijd een persoon niet verre van haar te
paard rijden, naar denwelken zij den voormelten slaaf Januarij sond,
laatende denselven versoeken, of soo goed wilde sijn, om naar haar huijs
te rijden en gemelten slaaf Claas gevangen te neemen, ontmoetende haar
relatante omtrent de Drie Fonteijnen, de burgers Pieter de Vos, David
Senekal en Schalk van der Merwe Jacobusz, dewelke zij relatante
versogte, dat haar slaaf Claas wilden gevangen neemen, deselve meede
neemen en brengen aan Stellenbosch bij haar man, dat die met hem doen
konden wat hij wilde, verhaalende haarlieden met eenen al het
gepasseerde.

Niets meer relateerende, geeft de relatante voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, bereijd sijnde, als ’t mogte gerequireert
werden, dit haar gerelateerde altijd nader te sullen gestand doen.

Aldus gerelateerd aan Stellenbosch op den 29^e\ ^October 1744, ten
overstaan van den boode Jan van Ellewe ende den soldaat Arend Wilkens,
als getuijgen hiertoe versogt.

\[get.\] Anna Marais.

Als getuijgen, \[get.\] J. van Ellewe, Arend Wilckens.

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] A. Schephausen, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement given on the requisition of the landdrost, *Sieur* Pieter
Lourensz, by Januarij van Rio de la Goa,^[^7]^ 20 years old at a guess,
bondsman of the burgher Francois Retief, being of the following
contents, namely:

That on Wednesday evening, the 14^th^ of this month, the testifier was
with his fellow slaves Claas and Augustus in the kitchen of the
residence on the farm of their owner, situated in the region of the
Wagenmakersvallei, when their master cried from the *voorhuijs*: “Call
to the dogs there”, whereupon the aforementioned Claas called out to the
back \[yard\]: “Tsa! tsa!”,^[^8]^ upon which his mistress asked: “Who is
calling tsa! tsa! there?”, to which the slave Augustus answered that it
had been the slave Claas calling out, to which his mistress, replied
again: “Can that pretty monkey not call out any better?”

That early in the morning of the following day, the aforementioned slave
Augustus told the said slave Claas in the pease plot that his mistress
had said that he, Claas, was a pretty monkey, and if he could not have
called out differently, whereupon the said Claas replied: “Even if I am
a pretty monkey, if I could get her, I would still sleep with her”.

That at 8 o’clock in the morning, after the testifier had eaten in the
kitchen with his two aforementioned fellow slaves, the slave Augustus,
while leaving, said to a female slave of his master, named Aurora: “You
must slaughter that lamb which was killed by the wolf in the
corral”,^[^9]^ to which the slave Claas answered: “What does the *meijd*
know about slaughtering, let the *baas* and not you give orders to the
*meijd*”, to which Augustus replied: “She may not be able to slaughter
that lamb, but she is well capable of knavish tricks”. The three of them
again went out to the pease plot in order to pick the same, when the
slave Augustus was ordered by his master to go and look if his horse
still had fodder, which is when the slave Claas said to the testifier,
when they got close to the pease plot: “I will not remain silent as long
as I am not sucking the blood of Augustus”,^[^10]^ which was heard by
the slave Augustus, who had come close to them, and who said to the
aforementioned slave Claas: “I would like to see what sort of guy could
suck my blood”. They then continued with their work while, shortly
thereafter, their master rode from there to Stellenbosch. Shortly after
their owner had ridden away, the slave Augustus took up a thick piece of
wood which was close by the pease plot, broke it into two pieces and
threw it down in front of him. The testifier then asked: “What do you
want to do with that wood”, to which Augustus answered: “I want to
garden”, yet as the testifier saw Augustus, while continuing to pick
peas, repeatedly picking up these pieces of wood and throwing them down
in front of him, he again asked him what he wanted to do with them, to
which the same answered: “You do not know, *jongen*, what I will do with
this wood”, saying about an hour after this to the slave Claas: “What
sort of guy said that he would suck my blood? – let him come now”, which
is when the slave Claas asked: “Do you want it?”, to which Augustus
answered: “You have said that you want to suck my blood, come on then”,
whereupon the slave Claas grabbed the aforementioned Augustus and wanted
to bite the same on his cheek, whereupon Augustus, while pushing the
slave Claas away, threw a clod of earth at his head, taking at the same
time one of the two sticks in his hand, giving Claas a blow with it on
the head and another on the back, who then grabbed the said Augustus and
started struggling with him until Augustus broke free and went to the
house; when the slave Claas likewise went to the house, while being
followed there by the testifier. At this time his mistress was sitting
at the table eating with the free black named Sinopaaij.

That when the said slave Claas came to a halt in the kitchen, the slave
Augustus told him: “You must not keep quiet now, you must tell that we
were fighting”, whereupon his mistress, coming into the kitchen, said:
“What are you doing here in the house, get away from here, you are
forever fighting over the old bitch. Because of you I have to leave my
own house; if I had known this, that she is such a bitch, I would not
have bought her”. The slave Augustus uninterruptedly inveighed against
the slave Claas, saying: “He wants to sleep with *nonje*”, whereupon his
mistress asked the slave Augustus what he said, to which the same
answered: “Claas said that he wants to sleep with *nonje*”, whereupon
his mistress turned around, went into the *voorhuijs* and sat on a
chair, weeping. The slave Claas then grabbed the aforementioned
Augustus, who had an axe in his hand, pulling the same outside the
kitchen, where they both started to fight again. His mistress then came
to stand inside the kitchen door and said to the slave Claas: “You just
go on to your work, Augustus will follow later”, the same then did go
again with him, the testifier, to the fields, when shortly thereafter
they both saw that their mistress was on the road with the aforenamed
Sinopaaij to Drie Fonteijnen, which is when the slave Claas said to the
testifier: “Come, you must run away with me, otherwise it would not end
well for you”, to which the testifier, answered: “No, I don’t want to
run away”. The slave Claas then again betook himself to the house in
order to search for the said slave Augustus, while saying: “Now that I
have said that, that I want to sleep with the *nonje*, I am as good as
dead, I will still get to stab that *jongen*”. The testifier then ran to
his mistress on the road to whom he reported the same, who then sent him
to the burgher Jan van de Vijver, who was on the road not far from
there, to request him to take the slave Claas prisoner and to take him
to Stellenbosch; who then also captured the aforementioned slave Claas
in a ditch close by his master’s residence, and took him from there to
Stellenbosch.

Finally the testifier also declares that the slaves Claas and Augustus
have always had quarrels and rows over the aforementioned *meijd*
Aurora.

There being nothing further to declare, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, being willing
to subsequently confirm the above, at any time, whenever this may be
required.

Thus related at Stellenbosch on 29 October 1744 in the presence of the
messenger of the court Jan van Ellewe and the soldier Arend Wilkens,
requested hereto as witnesses.

This mark X was set down by the slave Januarij van Rio de la Goa with
his own hand.

As witnesses, \[signed\] J. van Ellewe, Arend Wilckens \[*sic*\].

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Schephausen, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Statement given, on the requisition of the landdrost, *Sieur* Pieter
Lourensz, by Anna Marais, wife of the burgher Francois Retief, being of
the following contents, namely:  

That on the afternoon of Thursday the 14^th^ of this month, the
testifier was sitting and eating with the free black Sinopaaij in the
*voorhuijs* of the house on her farm situated in the Wagenmakersvallei
region, while her husband had ridden to Stellenbosch about an hour
beforehand. When she heard shouting outside the house, she got up from
the table and saw over the lower door that her bondsmen, named Claas and
Augustus, were fighting with each other around the pease plot, and that
the slave Augustus broke free and came running towards the house, and
was being followed by the slave Claas. Both of them came into the
kitchen shortly thereafter, when the testifier saw that both these
slaves were bloody and that the slave Augustus had taken an axe into his
hand and that the aforesaid Claas had a stick with him: whereupon she
went to the kitchen door and said to them: “What are you doing here in
the house, get away from here, you are forever fighting over that old
bitch, I have to leave my own house because of you; if I had known this,
that she is such a bitch, I would not have bought her”, while the slaves
Augustus and Claas were in the meantime inveighing against one another,
with the said Augustus saying to her: “Does *nonje* know what Claas has
said, he said even though he might be black, if he could get *nonje*, he
would nonetheless sleep with *nonje*”, upon which she went to sit on a
chair in the *voorhuijs*. Shortly hereafter, the slave Claas pulled
Augustus outside the kitchen, after which the testifier ordered Claas to
go to his work in the fields, while adding that the slave Augustus would
follow later. The slave Claas then went off to the fields again,
together with a slave of hers, named Januarij, while she, after she had
sent the slave Augustus away, then went with the free black Sinopaaij
from her house to her uncle, the burgher Steven du Toit, at Drie
Fonteijnen, to request him to come over.

That when the testifier was on the road not far from her house, there
came to her her bondsman Januarij van Rio de la Goa, who reported that
the slave Claas had gone to the house to look for Augustus, at which
time she saw a person riding on horseback not far from her, to whom she
sent the aforementioned slave Januarij to request the same if he would
be so good as to ride to her house and to capture the said slave Claas.
Around Drie Fonteijnen, the testifier met the burghers Pieter de Vos,
David Senekal and Schalk van der Merwe Jacobusz, whom she asked to
capture the slave Claas, to take him with them and to take him to her
husband in Stellenbosch who could do with him what he wanted, telling
them all at once everything that had happened.

There being nothing further to declare, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of her statement as in the text, being willing
to subsequently confirm this, her statement, if it may be required.

Thus related at Stellenbosch on 29 October 1744, in the presence of the
messenger of the court Jan van Ellewe and the soldier Arend Wilkens,
requested hereto as witnesses.

\[signed\] Anna Marais.

As witnesses, \[signed\] J. van Ellewe, Arend Wilckens.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Schephausen, secretary.

[^1]: * Augustus’s toponym is not given in these records, but according
    to the account of this case by Pretorius (1979), which gives more
    background on the participants, he was from Malabar. *

[^2]: * Anna’s husband, Francois Retief, whom she married in 1741, was
    absent from the farm at the time, which explains the impact of
    Claas’s reported threat to his owner’s wife. Retief was away at the
    annual military exercise in Stellenbosch (Pretorius 1979: 43-5; for
    the origins of this practice, see Biewenga 1999: 76-82). For a
    similar example of tensions that arose when the male slave-owner was
    away for the same reason, see 1763 Christina Strang. *

[^3]: * Anna was baptised in 1722 and so was probably in her early to
    mid-twenties at the time, De Villiers & Pama 1966, vol. II: 529 and
    776; Heese & Lombard 1986-2004, vol. 5: 445. Retief had six male
    slaves, but only one female. The sexual imbalance of slaves at the
    Cape, and particularly in the rural districts, was evident
    throughout the VOC period since most imported slaves were males.
    Only with the increasing proportion of locally born slaves at the
    end of the eighteenth century, and especially after the abolition of
    the slave trade in 1808, did this imbalance correct itself
    (Armstrong & Worden 1989: 133). *

[^4]: * Claas was charged with using ‘geheele onbetamelijke en brutaale
    segswoorden aangaande sijne lijfvrouw’ (wholly inappropriate and
    insolent words concerning his mistress) as well as ‘andere
    schelmereijen in ’t afweesen van sijn meester’ (other knavish tricks
    during the absence of his master), CJ 26, f. 106. The *eijsch*
    recommended that Claas be whipped, branded and sent to the public
    works in chains for 25 years, CJ 350, f. 624. The actual sentence
    passed was more lenient: Claas was to be whipped and sent back to
    his owner to work in chains for 3 years, while his owners were to
    pay the costs, CJ 26, f. 107. Claas claimed that he did not mean to
    do his mistress any harm by his words, and that Augustus falsely
    accused him and ‘altijt leugens bij de baas van mij aangebragt
    heeft’ (was always telling lies about me to the *baas*), CJ 26, f.
    106 and CJ 350, f. 641. The testimonies published here from the
    originals taken by the Stellenbosch landdrost, as well as the
    interrogation of Claas, are also available in CJ 350, ff. 625-41. *

[^5]:  In this sentence Claas is using the male form of the pronoun to
    refer to his mistress. This use of male pronouns for all genders is
    typical of certain second-language varieties, and may point to a
    distinctive feature of the sort of Dutch slaves spoke at the Cape.
    For a similar usage, see 1719 Jonas van Manado, document 3 (letter
    by Jonas). The use of *voor* and *met … samen* as employed here
    developed in Cape Dutch under the influence of Creole Portuguese and
    Malay, and became distinctive features of modern Afrikaans (Raidt
    1994: 116-47; Den Besten 2000; and Ponelis 1993: 347-48).

[^6]:  The word *bakkeleijen*, derived from Malay, was often used
    instead of the Dutch *vechten* and is still part of modern
    Afrikaans, spelt *baklei* (Boshoff & Nienaber 1967: 150).

[^7]:  Januarij van Rio de la Goa and his fellow slave Aaron van
    Ternaten became deserters in 1745 and were sentenced to death by
    hanging for numerous burglaries from farms in the Drakenstein
    district, CJ 27, ff. 53-4.

[^8]:  According to Franken this interjection, from the French *ça*, was
    the usual way with which to set dogs on in the eighteenth century,
    although it was also used in a more general way to show
    encouragement or to serve as provocation (see Franken 1953: 113-14
    for examples). Here, though, it seems rather to be used to silence
    the dogs.

[^9]:  There were no wolves in the Cape, but the Dutch called hyenas
    ‘wolves’, as well as referring to leopards as ‘tigers’, Boshoff &
    Nienaber 1967: 285; Schrire 2002: 6; and Schoeman 2001: 52.

[^10]:  An obscure phrase which might be an idiomatic expression from
    Claas’s own Asian language (and which Januarij from Rio de la Goa in
    south-east Africa may therefore not have understood). *Suijgen*,
    literally meaning ‘suck’, might be more idiomatically translated as
    ‘draw’ blood, although given that Claas later tries to *bite*
    Augustus on the cheek, he may indeed have been trying to suck his
    blood. ‘Sucking’ blood in this way might have had a symbolic or
    ritual significance which gave particular power over the victim (as
    suggested by Augustus’s response) or it may simply have been that
    Claas did not have a knife or other weapon with which to attack
    Augustus. The subsequent challenges with pieces of wood suggest that
    ritualised conflicts between two Asian slaves were taking place
    here. For another intriguing example of a Bengali slave using this
    expression, see 1726 Scipio van de Cust, n. 4.
