# JANUARIJ VAN BOEGIES ET AL.

*In this case eight slaves aimed to escape from the colony and to head
for the ‘land of the Caffers’.[^1] The plan was initiated by a
slave working as a charcoal burner in Hout Bay under the supervision of
a slave *mandoor*,[^2] and he persuaded other Cape Town slaves to
join him. The runaways stole a boat and headed first of all for
Hangklip. But they encountered major problems of obtaining food, of an
unseaworthy boat and were reported by a Khoi who saw their footprints on
the beach.[^3] *

**CJ 354** Criminele Process Stukken, 1746, Deel 2, ff. 464-67.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, Baatjoe van Samboua,
lijfeijgen van den burger Christiaan Victor, oud naar gissing 40 jaaren,
denwelken, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscaal Pieter Reede
van Oudshoorn, confesseerde waar ende waaragtig te zijn:

Dat den slaaf Isack, toebehoorende den burger Isack de Villiers, bij
desselfs lijfheer verhuurt zijnde, voor denselven in de Houtbaaij koolen
hebbende gebrand, hij confessant, ter zaake dat die koolen van daar
haalde, nu omtrent een week of vier geleeden met denselven afspraak
heeft genoomen om nae ’t Caffers land te gaan fugeeren.

Dat den confessant aen de Caab koomende, volgens afspraak met gemelten
Isack, den slaaff Damon heeft aengesprooken om meede te gaan drossen,
denwelken daarin bewilligt hebbende, hem confessant belooft heeft andere
slaaven insgelijx daartoe te sullen beweegen.

Dat den confessant sig op een Zondag na de middag begeeven hebbende na
de schaggerij van den burger Jan Holst, aldaar bij malkander zijn
gekoomen, den voormelde Isack, mitsgaaders de slaaven Damon van
Marthinus Wessel, Thomas en Jephta, toebehoorende den burger Jacobus
Steijn, Jason van Hendrik Hesse, Januarij van Hans Simonsz, Januarij van
Van der Schijff en Arlequijn van d’ heer Cornelis Eelders, vertoevende
sijlieden met haar neegenen in gemelten schaggerij tot des avonds
omtrent agt uuren, als wanneer sij den eenen voor en den anderen naar,
sig daarvandaan hebben begeeven na ’t vlaggemans huijsje agter de
clooff, alwaar de afspraak was, weeder bij malkander te sullen koomen om
gesamentlijk na de Houtbaaij te gaan, waarnatoe zij die nagt gemarcheert
zijnde, met het aenbreeken van den dag sijn aangekoomen, alwaar sij sig
op de aenwijsing van Isack in de bosjes hebben verstooken tot des avonds
daaranvolgende \[*sic*\], als wanneer sij sig met haar allen eerst
hebben begeeven naar het hutje waarin den slaaff Isack had huijs
gehouden, waaruijt hebben gehaald: een pot, een keetel en een emmer,
gaende hierop vier van ’t geselschap, te weeten: Isack, Jephta, Damon en
Thomas naar de plaats van den heer Le Sueur, alwaar uijt het werkhuijs
hebben gehaalt: het zijl en de mast, mitsgaders een riem tot de schuijt,
die aldaar op strand stond, toebehoorende, hetwelke zij bij den
confessant en zijne vier overige mackers gebragt hebbende, sig weeder na
de thuijn hebben vervoegt, uijt de welke sij insgelijx hebben gerooft
eenige milie, watermeloenen, pompoenen en appelen, welke vrugten door
haar lieden gesamentlijk in ’t voormelde zijl gedaan weesende, na de
schuijt op strand is gedragen, waarin sig nog was bevindende: vier
riemen, een dreg met zijn toebehooren, en twee klipvisch netjes, waarna
sij met hun neegenen de voornoemde schuijt te water gebragt hebbende,
daarin sijn geklommen en daarmeede teegens den dag van de wal
afgestooken, koomende, nadat vier dagen en vier nagten met mooij weer in
zee waaren geweest, door storm eerst aen de Hanglip ter houw, waardoor
de schuijt leck wierd, weshalven sig aldaar twee dagen opgehouden
hebben.

Dat zijlieden van daar met voormelde schuijt, die door Januarij, soo
veel doenelijk was, gekalvaat wierd, weeder in zee zijn gegaan, dog
weederom swaar weer bekoomende, en de schuijt soodanig leck werdende dat
deselve qualijk lens konden hoosen, sijn zij genoodsaakt geworden voor
de tweede reijse weeder te landen, sonder dat hij confessant weet te
seggen hoe dat die plaats genaamt is, alwaar de schuijt hebben laten
staan, en sig aldaar een paar dagen hebben opgehouden.

Dat zijlieden dus met haar neegenen vervolgens strandlangs gemarcheert
zijnde, in meening om haare reijse nae ’t Caffers land te vervolgen, in
de morgenstond op een berg gekoomen zijn, vanwaar sij de plaats, de
Uijle Craal genaamt, van verre sagen, alwaar sij, door swaare honger
gedreeven zijnde, de vrugt van een aldaar staanden boom hebben gegeeten,
waarvan sij alle dronken sijn geworden en dus aldaar zijn blijven leggen
tot ’s agtermiddaags, dat weederom bij haar kennis quamen, als wanneer
sij met malkander hebben geraadpleegt, dewijl grooten honger hadden om
kost te gaan soeken, begeevende den confessant sig ten dien eijnde nae
de plaats van den landbouwer Jan Swart, alwaar door denselven gevangen
genoomen en Caabwaarts in de tronck is gebragt geworden.

Aldus geconfesseert aen Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 10^e^ Maij 1746, voor d’
edele Js. Möller en Am. Cloppenburg, leeden uijt voormelde edelagtbare
Raad van Justitie, die de minute deeses, beneevens den confessant ende
mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den slaaf Baatjoe
van Samboua, denwelken deese, zijne gegeevene confessie, van woorde tot
woorde klaar en duijdelijk voorgeleesen zijnde, verklaarde daarbij
volkoomen te persisteeren, niet begeerende oversulx, datter iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden zal, als alleenig dat den slaaff Isack
de pot, keetel en emmer selfs uijt sijn hutje heeft gehaald, alsmeede
dat de schuijt, bevoor daarmeede van de wal staaken, reets leck was, en
betuijgde alle het voorenstaande de suijvere waarhijd te zijn.

Aldus gerecolleert aen Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 14^e^ Maij 1746, voor d’
edele Js. Möller en Jan Hendrik Hop, leeden uijt meergemelten Raad, die
de minute deeses, beneevens den confessant ende mij, secretaris, meede
behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

**CJ 354** Criminele Process Stukken, 1746, Deel 2, ff. 484-87.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekendede gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, Januarij van
Boegies, lijfeijgen van den burger Barend van der Schijff, oud naar
gissing 40 jaaren, denwelken, ter requisitie van den heer Independent
Fiscaal Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, confesseerde hoe waar is:

Dat nu ruijm drie weeken geleeden, den confesant \[*sic*\] van sijn
lijfheer gefugeert sijnde omdat sijn koelie loon niet konde opbrengen,
in een der Caabse straaten bij hem is gekoomen, den slaaf Baatjoe,
toebehoorende den burger Christiaan Victor, denwelken hem heeft
aangesprooken om meede na het Caffers land te gaan fugeeren, waarin hij
confessant bewilligt hebbende, sig volgens afspraak met denselven op een
Sondag begeeven heeft na de schaggerij van den burger Jan Holst, alwaar
successivelijk bij malkander quaamen: eeven genoemde Baatjoe, neevens de
slaven Thomas en Jephta, beijde van Jacobus Steijn, Isack, toebehoorende
den burger Isack de Villiers, Jason van Hendrik Hesse, Januarij van Hans
Simonsz, Damon van Marthinus Wessel, en Arlequijn van d’ heer Cornelis
Eelders, in welke schaggereij sijlieden tot omtrent de klocke seeven
uuren des avonds verbleeven sijnde, den eenen voor en den andere naar,
sig daarvandaan hebben begeeven bij ’t vlaggemans huijse agter de Cloof,
alwaar de afspraak was bij malkander weeder te koomen om na de Houtbaaij
te gaan, waarnatoe sijlieden met haar neegenen nog dien eijgensten nagt
sijn gemarcheert en, aldaar aan gekoomen weesende, hebben sij sig in de
bosjes verschoolen gehouden tot des avonds daaraanvolgende; als wanneer
de slaaven Isack, Baatjoe, Jephta en Damon sig hebben vervoegt na de
plaats van d’ heer Le Sueur, vanwaar die vier slaven met sig bragten:
een zijl, ’twelk tot de schuijt, die aldaar aan strand stond, behoorde,
’tgeene sij aan den confessant en sijne vier mackers overgegeeven
hebbende, sig voor de tweede reijse naar voornoemde plaats hebben
begeeven, vanwaer sij met sig bragten: eenige milie, pompoenen,
watermiloenen en appelen, die sij uijt de tuijn aldaar hadden gestoolen,
hetgeen door hun allen in voornoemde zeijl gedaan en in de schuijt wierd
gedragen, waarin sig nog was bevindende: vier riemen, een zijl, een dreg
en twee klipvisch netjes, klimmende sijlieden vervolgens met hun allen
in voornoemde schuijt, waarmeede sij die nagt van de wal sijn gestooken
en daarmeede vier daagen en vijf nagten in zee zijn gebleeven, landende
de eerst aan de Hanglip aan, alwaar twee dagen verbleeven omdat
ontwaarden dat de schuijt lek was, die door den confessant so veel
doenelijk was gekalvaat en verholpen wierd, begeevende sig van daar met
gedagte schuijt weeder in zee, dog dien eijgensten avond swaar sweer
\[*sic*\] bekoomende, en opnieuws een leckagie gewaar werdende, die
sodanig swaar was, dat de schuijt qualijk boven water konden houden,
sijn sij genoodsaakt geworden voor de tweede reijse weederom de wal te
kiesen, en op een plaats dewelke, so als naderhand vernoomen hebben,
Onrus genaamt werd, aan te landen, alwaar de voormelde schuijt op strand
hebben laten staan en sig aldaar een paar daagen opgehouden.

Dat sijlieden dus met haar neegenen strandlangs gegaan sijnde, van
gedagten weesende om haar reijse na ’t Caffers land te vervolgen,
gekoomen sijn aan de Uijlekraal, alwaar den slaaff Baatjoe van hun is
afgeraakt, denwelken seijde kost te sullen gaan soeken, waaraan sij ter
dier tijd gebreck hadden, en naar omtrent een dag na voornoemde Baatjoe
aldaar tevergeefs gewagt hebbende, sijn sij het strand langs gegaan,
werdende sijlieden met haar agten ter plaatse, so als naderhand
vernoomen hebben, waar het schip Schoonenberg is gestrand, door twee
Europianen en twee slaaven, jder te paard sittende en met geweer
voorsiende sijnde, gevangen genoomen, vanwaar eerst na Stellenbosch en
vervolgens Caabwaarts in de tronk sijn gebragt geworden.

Aldus geconfesseert, bij vertolking uijt het Portugeesch, aan Cabo de
Goede Hoop den 7^e\ ^Maij 1746, voor d’ edele Js. Möller en Am.
Cloppenburg, leeden uijt voormelde edelagtbaren Raad van Justitie, die
de minute deeses, beneevens den confessant ende mij, secretaris, meede
behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaren Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den slaaf Januarij
van Boegies, denwelken deese, sijne gegeevene confessie, van woorde tot
woorde klaar en duijdelijk voorgeleesen sijnde, verklaarde daarbij
volkoomen te persisteeren, niet begeerende oversulx datter iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal, als alleenig dat het, in plaats
van Baatjoe den slaaf Thomas is geweest, die na de plaets van d’ heer Le
Sueur gegaan is, mitsgaders dat de schuijt, bevoor daar meede van de wal
sijn gestooken, leck was.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 10^e\ ^Maij 1746, voor d’
edele Js. Möller en Am. Cloppenburg, leeden uijt meergemelten Raad, die
de minute deeses, beneevens den confessant ende mij, secretaris, meede
behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

**CJ 354** Criminele Process Stukken, 1746, Deel 2, ff. 498-99.

Relaas gegeeven, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscael Pieter
Reede van Oudshoorn, door den eerwaerden heer predikant Frans le Sueur,
inhoudende als volgt:

Dat nu omtrent een week of drie geleeden, sonder in den praecisen dag of
datum te willen bepaelt sijn, bij den heer relatant op desselfs plaets,
aen ’t Rondebossje \[*sic*\] geleegen, is gekoomen een sijner
leijfeijgenen, Coridon genaamt, denwelken als mandoor op de plaats in de
Houtbaaij geleegen bescheijden is, bij sig hebbende, een slaef van den
burger Wijnand Victor, den heer relatant bij de naam onbekent, met
berigt dat den laest gemelten jonge des voorigen daegs ’s morgens, bij
hem Coridon was gekoomen en hem te kennen hadde gegeeven dat de
leevensmiddelen, bestaende in wat meel en sout, neevens een eijser pot
en pan, door desselfs lijfheer tot gebruijkt van hem en zijn meede
slaeven, die aldaer voor denselven houtskoolen brandenden, en ’twelk een
en ander in een, teegens de berg gemaekt, hutje geborgen was geweest,
die nagt daeruijt waeren gestoolen en dat sulks seekerlijk door drossers
moeste verrigt zijn.

Dat voormelde Coridon sig hierop ten eersten met voormelde slaef op weg
hadde begeeven om te sien off niet iets konde ontdecken, het spoor van
veele persoonen, die barvoets gegaen waeren, van ’t huijs tot aen ’t
strant vernoomen hadde, ontwaerende hij Coridon soo voorts dat de
schuijt, die aldaer op twee rollen voor zijn dreg leggende hadde
gestaen, weg was, en sig daerop nae ’t werkhuijs, welkers deur niet
geslooten, maer eenelijk met een klink toegemaekt was, begeevende, sag
hij dat de riemen, mitsgaders het zeijl, tot voormelten schuijt
behoorende, insgelijk gestoolen waeren, bevindende nog bij naeder
ondersoek dat uijt de thuijn een parthij mili afgeplukt en eenige
boomvrugten waeren gestoolen, mitsgaders dat ’er een hoen, ses of
seeven, absent was.

Dat zijlieden met hun beijden dien geheelen dag overal, soo wel
strandlangs, als in ’t gebergte, gesogt hebbende, egter niets van
voornoemde schuijt vernoomen, nogte eenige drossers ontdeckt hadden;
naer welk bekoomen berigt den heer relatant gemelten twee slaeven
Caabwaerts heeft gesonden, ten eijnde van dit voorval aen den heer
requirant de behoorlijke kennisse te geeven.

Niets meer relateerende, geeft den relatant voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, met praesentatie van dit, zijn
gerelateerde, ten allen tijden, soo ’t mogte vereijsch werden, nader te
sullen gestand doen.

Aldus gerelateert aen Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 2^e^ Maij 1746, ten
overstaen der clercquen Otto Wilhelm Rotenburg en Oloff Christoff
Karnspek, als getuijgen, die de minute deeses, beneevens den relatant
ende mij, secretaris behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

**1/STB** **3/8** Criminele Verklaringen, 1702-1749, unpaginated.

Weledele gestrenge heer!

Op gisteren t’ huijs komende, zijn alhier door de burgers Wm. Odendaal
en Herms. Pietersz in de tronk gebragt, acht slaven, als: Januarij van
Boegis, toebehoorende Barend van der Schijf, Damon van Batavia van
Martinus Wesselsz, Isaac van Ternaaten van Isaac de Villiers, Januarij
van Macasser van eenen Hans de Vlaggeman, Jason van Macasser van Hendrik
Hesse, Harlequijn van Bengalen van d’ Heer Eelders, Jephta van Batavia
van Hermanus Steijn, en Thomas van Samboua van de weduwe Molvanger,
dewelke hierneevens, onder ’t geleijde van een commando, Caabwaarts
hebbe opgesonden. Voormelte twee burgers hebben mij bericht dat op
Vrijdag, de 15^e\ ^deeser maand, de veewagter van den eersten gemelten,
zijnde een Hottentot, teegens den avond t’ huijs komende op zijn plaats,
geleegen aan de Haagel Kraal, hem bericht dat eenig spoor aan ’t strand
ontdeckt hadde, waarop hij zig met den burger Hermanus Pietersz, die sig
ter dier tijd bij hem bevond, des ’s nagts \[*sic*\], te paard en
gewaapent, naar derwaarts heeft begeeven, achtervolgende met hun beijde
het spoor tot ’s aanderen daags agtermiddags, komende alsdoen ter
plaatse alwaar het schip Schoonenberg gebleeven is, treffende aldaar aan
voormelten 8 slaven, waarvan 2 sogten weg te kruijpen, dog zij met hun
beijden schielijk toerijdende, en deselve toegeroepen hebbende: Staa! of
dat gaat er door; hebben gemelten slaven haarlieden gesmeekt van niet te
willen schieten, en gaven haar alsoo vrijwillig gevangen. Deese twee
voornoemte burgers, in het opbrengen van die 8 slaven, van deselve
verstaan hebbende dat de schuijt waarmeede zij gefugeert waren, aan
strand, omtrent de plaats van de burger Barend Pietersz van Weesel lag,
zijn in passant naar derwaarts gereeden, vindende de schuijt opgehaald
op strand leggen, bij een heel kleijn baaijtje genaamt Onrust, zijnde
een groote platboomde schuijt met een mast daarin, zijnde 7 of 8 kniën
daarvan aan stukken, mitsgaders van vooren open gebarsten, hetwelke die
schuijt, soo verstaan hebbe, bekomen heeft agter de Hanglip, alwaar zij
eerst met de schuijt teegens de klippe aangekoomen en genoodsaakt zijn
geweest deselve aldaar te vermaaken; de voorseijde slaven zijn, volgens
hun voorgeeven, met hun neegenen met de schuijt gedrost, waarvan eenen,
Baatjoe van Samboua, toebehoorende den burger Christiaan Victor, bij
hunne aankomst aan Onrust van haarlieden is weggegaan.

Waarmeede deese eijndigende beveele ik U Weledele Gestrenges diebaare
\[*sic*\] persoon en illustre familie in de alleen seekere hoeden van de
almagtigen God, en betuijge dat ik, met het diepste respect, altoos zal
zijn,

Den 23^e^ April 1746.

Weledele heer.[^4]

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, Baatjoe van Samboua, bondsman of
the burgher Christiaan Victor, 40 years old at a guess, who, on the
requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van
Oudshoorn, confesses it to be the whole truth:

That the slave Isack, belonging to the burgher Isack de Villiers and who
was rented out to his \[Baatjoe’s\] owner, was burning charcoal for him
in Hout Bay, and when the confessant collected the charcoal from there,
about four weeks ago now, he agreed with Isack to flee to the land of
the *Caffers*.

That when the confessant got to the Cape,[^5] he, in accordance with
what was agreed with Isack, talked to the slave Damon about joining them
to run away, who was willing to do so, and promised him, the confessant,
to also persuade other slaves to this.

That one Sunday, after midday, the confessant proceeded to the tavern of
the burgher Jan Holst, at which place he got together the aforementioned
Isack, as well as the slaves: Damon of Marthinus Wessel, Thomas and
Jephta, belonging to the burgher Jacobus Steijn, Jason of Hendrik Hesse,
Januarij of Hans Simonsz, Januarij of Van der Schijff and Arlequijn of
the honourable Cornelis Eelders. All nine of them remained in the said
tavern until about 8 o’clock in the evening, which is when they, one
after the other, went from there to the flagman’s house behind the
kloof,[^6] which is where they had agreed to congregate again in order
to set out all together to Hout Bay, which is where they progressed to
that night and where they arrived at the break of day. There, as shown
to them by Isack, they hid themselves in the bushes until the following
evening, which is when all of them first went to the little hut in which
the slave Isack kept house, from where they took a pot, a kettle and a
bucket, whereupon four of the company, viz. Isack, Jephta, Damon and
Thomas, went to the farm of the honourable Le Sueur,[^7] from where
they took out of the workhouse a sail and a mast, as well as a rope
which belonged to the boat which was kept on the beach, which they
brought to the confessant and his four other mates, when they again set
out to the garden, from where they also stole some mealies, watermelons,
pumpkins and apples, which fruit, after all of them had placed it in the
aforementioned sail, they carried to the boat on the beach, in which
boat was also to be found four ropes, a grapnel[^8] with its
accessories, and two small fishing nets. After this, all nine of them
took the aforementioned boat to the water, got into it and took off with
it from the shore in daylight. After being on the sea with good weather
for four days and four nights, they went ashore at Hanglip because of a
storm, which caused the boat to leak, and for which reason they remained
at that place for two days.

That from there they again went out to sea on the aforementioned boat,
which had been caulked as far as possible by Januarij, but, experiencing
heavy weather once again, and with the boat leaking so much that they
could hardly scoop it empty, they were forced to land again for the
second time; without the confessant being able to say what the place is
called where they left the boat behind and where they remained for a few
days.

That the nine of them then proceeded along the beach with the intention
to continue their journey to the land of the *Caffers* and during the
morning came on top of a mountain from where they could see from afar
the farm named De Uijle Craal, at which place they, driven by extreme
hunger, ate the fruit of a tree there, from which they all became drunk
and remained lying there like this until late in the afternoon when they
again recovered their senses, at which time they deliberated with one
another about going to look for food as they were very hungry. The
confessant then, with this in mind, set out to the farm of the farmer
Jan Swart, where he was taken prisoner and brought to prison at the
Cape.

Thus confessed at the Cape of Good Hope on 10 May 1746 before their
honourables Js. Möller and Am. Cloppenburg, members of the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed the
original of this, together with the confessant and me, the secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave Baatjoe van Samboua,
who, after this, his given confession, was read out word by word,
clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore not
desiring that anything more should be added to or taken from it, except
only that the slave Isack himself took the pot, kettle and bucket from
his little hut, and also that the boat had been leaking before they took
off with it from the shore; and declares all of the aforegoing to be the
whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 14 May 1746 before the
honourables Js. Möller and Jan Hendrik Hop, members of the
aforementioned Council, who have properly signed the original of this,
together with the confessant and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, Januarij van Boegies, bondsman of
the burgher Barend van der Schijff, 40 years old at a guess, who, on the
requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van
Oudshoorn, confesses it to be true:

That fully three weeks ago now, after the confessant had fled from his
owner because he could not raise his *koeli geld*,[^9] the slave
Baatjoe, belonging to the burgher Christiaan Victor, came to him in one
of the streets of Cape Town and talked to him about fleeing together to
the land of the *Caffers*, which the confessant was willing to do. On
one Sunday he went with the same, in accordance with their agreement, to
the tavern of the burgher Jan Holst, where successively congregated the
said Baatjoe, as well as the slaves: Thomas and Jephta, both of Jacobus
Steijn, Isack, belonging to the burgher Isack de Villiers, Jason of
Hendrik Hesse, Januarij of Hans Simonsz, Damon of Marthinus Wessel, and
Arlequijn of the honourable Cornelis Eelders. They all remained in this
tavern until about seven o’clock in the evening when, one after the
other, they went from there and again got together at the house of the
flagman behind the kloof, as they had agreed \[upon\], in order to go to
Hout Bay, to which all nine of them proceeded that very same night and,
when they arrived there, they hid in the bushes until the following
evening, which is when the slaves Isack, Baatjoe, Jephta and Damon set
out to the farm of the honourable Le Sueur, from where these four slaves
brought with them a sail, which belonged to the boat which stood there
on the beach and which they handed over to the confessant and his four
mates, and then went for a second time to the aforementioned farm, from
where they brought with them some mealies, pumpkins, watermelons and
apples which they had stolen from the garden there, which was put into
the sail and carried by all of them to the boat, in which was also to be
found four ropes, a sail, a grapnel and two small fishing nets. All of
them then got into this aforementioned boat with which they took off
from the shore that night, and remained in it on sea for four days and
five nights, landing at first at Hanglip, where they remained for two
days because they had noticed that the boat was leaking and which was
caulked and repaired, as far as possible, by the confessant. From there
they again went out to sea but, experiencing stormy weather that very
same evening and once more noticing a leak which was so heavy that the
boat could hardly be kept above water, they were forced to choose the
shore for the second time and to land at a place, which, as they later
learned, is named Onrust, where they left the aforementioned boat on the
beach and remained for a few days.

That all nine of them went along the beach, being of the intention to
continue their journey to the land of the *Caffers*, and got to De Uijle
Kraal where the slave Baatjoe separated from them, saying that he would
go and look for food, of which they had a shortage at this time, and
after having waited in vain there for about a day for aforesaid Baatjoe,
they went along the beach until all eight of them were taken prisoner at
the place, as they later learned, where the ship Schoonenberg got
stranded, by two Europeans and two slaves, each sitting on a horse and
armed with guns, from where they were first taken to Stellenbosch and
then to the prison at the Cape.

Thus confessed, through interpretation from the Portuguese, at the Cape
of Good Hope on 7 May 1746 before their honourables Js. Möller and Am.
Cloppenburg, members from the aforementioned honourable Council of
Justice, who have properly signed the original of this, together with
the confessant and me, the secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave Januarij van Bougies,
who, after this, his given confession, was read out word by word,
clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore not
desiring that anything more should be added to or taken from it, except
only that it had been the slave Thomas and not Baatjoe who had gone to
the farm of the honourable Le Sueur, as also that the boat had been
leaking before they took off with it from the shore.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 10 May 1746 before the
honourables Js. Möller and Am. Cloppenburg, members of the
aforementioned Council, who have properly signed the original of this,
together with the confessant and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable independent
fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, by the reverend minister, the
honourable Frans le Sueur, of the following content:

That about three weeks ago now, without wanting to guess at the definite
day or date, there came to the honourable testifier on his farm situated
at Rondebosch one of his bondsmen, named Coridon, who was assigned as
*mandoor* to his farm situated in Hout Bay, having with him a slave of
the burgher Wijnand Victor, whose name is unknown to the honourable
testifier, with the report that, during the morning, this slave came to
Coridon and informed him that the supplies, consisting of some flour and
salt, together with an iron pot and pan, given by his owner for use by
him and his fellow slaves who were there burning charcoal for the same,
and which were all stored in a little hut constructed against the
mountain, were stolen from there during the night, and that this was no
doubt done by deserters.

That upon this the aforementioned Coridon immediately went with the
aforesaid slave to see if something could be discovered, and found
footprints of several people going barefoot[^10] from the house down
to the beach, and Coridon then also noticed that the boat, which had
been standing there on two rolls lying in front of its grapnel, was
gone. He then went to the workroom, the door of which was not locked but
only closed by a latch, where he saw that the ropes, as well as the sail
belonging to the aforementioned boat, had also been stolen, finding on
further investigation that a lot of mealies were picked off and some
fruit stolen from the trees in the garden, as well as that about six or
seven chickens were missing.

That they both searched the whole day everywhere, both along the beach
as well as on the mountains, but could not see anything of the
aforementioned boat, nor discover any deserters. After receiving this
report, the honourable testifier sent the said two slaves to the Cape in
order to properly inform the honourable petitioner[^11] of this
incident.

There being nothing further to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, while
offering to subsequently confirm this, his report, at all times, if it
may be required.

Thus related at the Cape of Good Hope on 2 May 1746 in the presence of
the clerks Otto Wilhelm Rotenburg and Oloff Christoff Karnspek, as
witnesses, who have properly signed the original of this, together with
the testifier and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Right honourable Lord!

Yesterday, when I got home, the burghers Wm. Odendaal and Herms.
Pietersz brought here to the prison eight slaves, viz.: Januarij van
Bougies, belonging to Barend van der Schijf, Damon van Batavia of
Marthinus Wesselsz, Isaac van Ternaaten of Isaac de Villiers, Januarij
van Macassar of one Hans de Vlaggeman, Jason van Macassar of Hendrik
Hesse, Harlequijn van Bengalen of the honourable Eelders, Jephta van
Batavia of Hermanus Steijn and Thomas van Samboua of the widow
Molvanger, whom I have sent to the Cape under the escort of a commando,
together with this \[letter\]. The aforementioned two burghers reported
to me that on Friday, the 15^th^ of this month, the first named
burgher’s herdsman, who is a Hottentot, came home in the evening on his
farm, situated at the Haagel Kraal, and reported to him that he had
discovered some footprints on the beach, whereupon he \[the burgher\]
set out there during the night, armed and on horseback, with the burgher
Hermanus Pietersz, who at this time was at his \[farm\]. Both of them
followed the footprints until the afternoon of the following day, when
they got to the place where the ship Schoonenberg had run ashore,
finding there the aforementioned eight slaves, of whom two tried to
hide, yet both burghers suddenly galloped towards them and called to
them: “Stand, or we’ll shoot!”, whereupon the said slaves begged them
not to shoot and thus surrendered themselves willingly. In bringing
these eight slaves in, these two aforenamed burghers understood from
them that the boat with which they had fled was lying on the beach in
the vicinity of the burgher Barend Pietersz van Weesel’s farm, and,
passing by, they went to that place, finding that the boat was lying
drawn up on the beach at a very small bay named Onrust, being a large
flat-bottomed boat with a mast in it, of which seven or eight
knees[^12] were broken as well as being cracked open on the front,
which \[crack\], as they understood, the boat received behind Hanglip,
which is where they first ran with the boat onto the rocks and were
forced to repair it. According to the assertions of the aforesaid
slaves, nine of them deserted with the boat, of which one Baatjoe van
Samboua, belonging to the burgher Christiaan Victor, had left them after
their arrival at Onrust.

With which I end this, commending your right honourable Lord’s beloved
person and illustrious family to the only certain protection of Almighty
God, and declare that I will always be with the deepest respect,

The 23^rd^ of April 1746.

Honourable Lord.[^13]

[^1]: * By this they meant the region of the Eastern Cape. For other
    examples of runaway slaves aiming to reach this area, outside the
    reach of the Cape authorities, see 1751 Januarij van Boegies et al.
    and 1760 Achilles van de West Cust et al. *

[^2]: * A slave appointed as an overseer over other slaves. For more
    details on this system, see 1768 Frans van Madagascar, n. 2.*

[^3]: * The *eijsch *and testimonies are in CJ 354, ff. 459-99. The
    testimonies of the eight accused are mostly very similar and
    repetitive, but we publish here those of Januarij van Boegies and
    Baatjoe van Samboua who between them relate the story, as well as
    that of Ds. le Sueur, who provides some details from the ‘other
    side’. The accused claimed in their defence that they ‘niet geweeten
    te hebben dat er in ’t weg neemen van den schuijt soo veel quaad
    stak’ (did not know that it was so wrong to take away the boat).
    They were sentenced to be whipped and to be returned to their owners
    to work in chains for three years, CJ 28, ff. 81-4. This was
    considerably milder than the death sentence recommended in the
    *eijsch*.*

[^4]:  The document ends here like this, with no signature, which means
    it must have been a rough copy.

[^5]:  Meaning Cape Town.

[^6]:  ‘Kloof’ probably refers to what is now known as Kloofnek. This
    was probably the house of the flagman on Lion’s Head, which was a
    meeting place of slaves and suspected runaways (see 1736 Table
    Valley slaves, n. 7.).

[^7]:  Frans le Sueur arrived at the Cape in 1729 and worked as a
    minister until his early retirement because of ill health in 1744.
    He acquired a farm at Rondebosch but his testimony here shows that
    he had placed a slave *mandoor* and another slave on a second farm
    in Hout Bay, VOC 5910, ff. 6 and 13; DSAB IV: 308-9.

[^8]:  A type of small anchor.

[^9]:  On *koeli geld* and the problems faced by Cape Town slaves who
    were unable to get it for their owners, see 1718 Doulat van Balij,
    n. 5 and 1737 Januarij van Tutocorijn.

[^10]:  Theoretically slaves were not allowed to wear shoes. Although
    there were exceptions, it seems as if in practice most slaves had to
    go barefoot (De Kock 1950: 49; Schoeman 2001: 534).

[^11]:  This term is sometimes used in court documents to refer to the
    prosecutor (either the fiscal or landdrost) as the *eijsch* they
    drew up was in effect a petition against the defendants in a case.

[^12]:  Pieces of wood cut in the form of a bent knee, which support
    horizontal planks (Gawronski 1996: 133).

[^13]:  See note 4 above.
