1.  REIJNIER VAN MADAGASCAR

*This is an extraordinary case of an escaped slave who survived on his
own unnoticed for twenty years in the mountains around the Franschhoek
region. On recapture, he vividly recalled the events which led to his
desertion. The daughter he had with the woman he called his
wife,*^*[^1]*^* Manika van Bengalen, was severely maltreated by their
owner’s wife, for unknown reasons. Reijnier was a loyal and
long-standing slave, who had built up the farm by his labour, but he was
taunted by other slaves for his failure to defend his daughter. He
eventually cracked, attacked his owner with a knife and fled to the
mountains. Twenty years later he was recaptured. By then his owners and
his daughter were dead. Only Manika, now aged 60, survived. For all
these years she had not known what had happened to Reijnier or whether
he was still alive.*^*[^2]*^

*The case gives a vivid insight into psychological and emotional
tensions which slave families could undergo on a remote farm, as well as
the ability of an isolated runaway to survive for many years in the
surrounding mountains. The story did not have a happy ending: Reijnier
was sentenced to labour for life on Robben Island.*^*[^3]*^* *

**CJ 357** Criminele Process Stukken, 1749, ff. 7-9v.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaaren Raad van Justitie des Casteels de Goede Hoop, Reijnier van
Madagascar, lijfeijgen der erfgenamen van wijlen den landbouwer Matthijs
Krugel, naar gissing 60 jaaren, denwelken, ter requisitie van den
landdrost van Stellenbosch en Draakensteijn, sieur Adriaan van Schoor,
confesseerde hoe waar is:

Dat den confessant, nu ruijm twintig jaaren geleeden, omdat de
huijsvrouw van bovengenoemde sijn lijfheer des confessants dogter,
Sabina genaamd, dagelijx, selfs sonder reedenen bastonneerde, en gesegde
sijn lijfvrouw, dewelke die meijd nogtans niet leijden mogte, ongeagt
des confessants veelvuldige smeekingen, deselve in geenen deele verkopen
wilde, maar haar, in steede van sulx, geduurig mishandelde; gelijk op
een seekeren Saturdag teegens den avond, wanneer den confessant van ’t
ploegen te huijs komende, en aan de meede slavin Manica, sijnde des
confessants vrouw, vraagde om de afgetrocke thee bladeren van desselfs
lijfvrouw, waarop die meijd antwoorde: De juffrouw heeft vandag geen
thee maar wijn gedronken, door gesegde meijd aan hem alsdoen verhaald
wierd, hoe zijne lijfvrouw genoemde Sabina dien dag weederom met een
sjambok, alvoorens deselve naakt hebbende uijtkleeden en in een soo
genaamde poolse bok doen spannen, deerlijk geslagen hadde; des deselve
uijt het huijs weg en agter een kraal gevlugt was, vanwaar den
confessant genoemde Sabina selfs weederom van daar en in de combuijs
gebragt heeft; alwaaromme ook gesegde slavin alsdoen opdrossen wilde,
edog den confessant teegens deselve seijde van sulx niet te doen, maar
veel liever naar derselver lijfheer te gaan en dien om vergiffenis te
smeeken. Weshalven des confessants meede slaven, genaamd Hans en Patas,
de geduurige mishandeling van desselfs voornoemte dogter Sabina siende,
dikmaals tot hem confessant gesegt hebben: Gij bent soo een oude jonge
en hebt gemaakt dat de plaats betaald is, kunt soo wel ploegen als
alderhande ander werk doen en kunt dog sulke mishandeling verdragen; die
meijd moeste onse dogter niet sijn, of wij souden de baas wat anders
leeren. En dat vervolgens des confessants lijfheer, dien eijgesten
Saturdag avond, wanneer soo wel den confessant als de andere slaven
meede in de combuijs waeren, daar in is gekomen, een beusem stok in zijn
hand hebbende, en de meijd Sabina opnieuws sloeg; dierhalven dan den
confessant, uijt mismoedigheijd en hertseer, een op de, in de combuijs
staande, taafel leggende mes, opgevat en daarmeede desselfs veelgemelten
lijfheer drie steeken toegebragt heeft, sonder te kunnen seggen waar,
aangesien de lamp genoegsaam half uijtgebrand was, neemende alstoen den
confessant immediaat de vlugt boven ’t geploegde land van sijn lijfheer,
alwaar sig omtrent een week opgehouden hebbende, vervolgens van daar
begeeven heeft op ’t Franshoeks gebergte, en aldaar, naar sijn best
onthoud, den tijd van sesthien jaaren verbleeven is, waarna sig van daar
vervoegde naar ’t gebergte geleegen boven de plaats van Jan du Busson,
alwaar sig weederom eenige jaaren opgehouden heeft, en ook aldaar, voor
wijnige dagen, door eenige Europeesen gevangen, naar Stellenbosch
gebragt en vervolgens in handen der justitie geleevert is.

Betuijgende den confessant nog laatstelijk dat denselven geduurende in
al dien tijd geen mensch gesprooken heeft, sig geërneerd hebbende met
dasjes en vissen dewelke hij, door daartoe gemaakte gereedschappen,
gevangen had.

Aldus geconfesseert in de Neederduijtsche taale, die den confessant
reedelijk spreekt en verstaat, aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 13^e^
Januarij 1749, voor d’ edele Cornelis Eelders en Paulus Artoijs, leede
uijt voormelten edelagtbaaren Raad van Justitie, die de minute deeses,
beneevens den confessant en mij, gesworen clercq, meede behoorlijk
hebben onderteekent.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaaren Raad van Justitie des Casteels de Goede Hoop, Reijnier van
Madagascar, denwelken deese, sijne gegeevene confessie, van woorde tot
woorde klaar en duijdelijk voorgeleesen weesende, verklaarde daarbij
volkomen te persisteeren, oversulx niet begeerde dat er iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal, en verklaarde alle ’t
bovenstaande de suijvere waarheijd te zijn.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 14^e^ Januarij 1749, voor
d’ edele Cornelis Eelders en P. Artoijs, leede uijt voormelten
edelagtbaaren Raad van Justitie, die de minute deeses beneevens den
confessant en mij, gesworen clercq, meede behoorlik hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, gesworen clercq.

**CJ 357** Criminele Process Stukken, 1749, ff. 14-15.

Relaas gegeeven, ter requisitie van den heer landdrost Adriaan van
Schoor, door den burger Pieter Reijnertsz., zijnde van den volgenden
inhoud, namentlijk:

Dat hij relatant, seedert eenigen tijd aan Draakensteijn, op de plaats
van den landbouwer Jan du Buisson, gewerkt hebbende, aldaar, op Vrijdag
den 3^e\ ^deeser, van den beestewagter van gemelten Jan du Buisson
verstaan heeft dat sig daaromtrent aan het rivier ofte het gebergte
drossers moesten ophouden,’twelke dien jongen presumeerde omdat twee
vischnetjes en eenige strikjes, daar men dasjes of ander kleijn gedierte
meede konde vangen, had vinden leggen, alsmeede dat boven aan het
gebergte, teegens of onder een klip, een huijsje van bosjes toegemaakt
ontwaart hadde. Dat hij relatant, beneevens den broeder van voorseijde
Jan du Buisson, genaamt David du Buisson, ende een persoon met naamen
Schellenberg, zijnde knegt bij gemelten Jan du Buisson, dien eijgensten
agtermiddag hun begeeven hebben, naar het gebergte, meede neemende den
voornoemden beestewagter ende nog een slaaf van Jan du Buisson, ten
eijnde hun dat huijsje te laaten aanwijsen. Dat zijlieden, niet verre
van dat huijsje, hun dien nagt door opgehouden hebbende, teegens den dag
hetselve doorsoekende, niets gevonden hadden als strikjes die aldaar
opgespannen waren; dog zijlieden gesamentlijk die contreije
rondsoekende, ontwaarde den meervoorengemelten beestewagter een jonge,
waarschouwende sulx tegelijk aan den relatant en zij bijhebbend
geselschap. Dat zijlieden hierop gesamentlijk daarnatoe gegaan zijn,
vindende omtrent een paar hondert treeden van het dikwils gemelten
huijsje, naar de kant van het Draakensteijnsche gebergte, een slaaf
denwelken ten eersten bij den burger David du Buisson afgevraagt wierd,
of hij niet Reijnier was van Matthijs Krugel, daar denselven: Ja! op
antwoorde, met bijvoeging dat sig aan dat gebergte omtrent seeven of
acht jaaren opgehouden en sig met gevangene dasjes en visch uijt het
Berg rivier erneert hadde; waarop zijlieden denselven slaaf Reijnier
gevangen genomen en naar Stellenbosch in de tronk gebragt hadden.

Voorts niets meer relateerende, geeft den relatant voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, bereijd zijnde, als ’t mogte verijscht
werden, het voorenstaande ten allen tijden nader te sullen gestand doen.

Aldus gerelateerd ter secretarije aan Stellenbosch op den 8^e^ Januarij
1749, in ’t bijweesen van de voorleeser Abraham Faure ende den boode
Hendrik van Ellewe, als getuijgen hiertoe versogt, die de minute deeses,
neevens den relatant ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben
onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] A. Schephausen, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, Reijnier van Madagascar,
bondsman of the heirs of the late farmer Matthijs Krugel, 60 years old
at a guess, who on the requisition of the landdrost of Stellenbosch and
Draakensteijn, *Sieur* Adriaan van Schoor, confesses it to be true:

That fully twenty years ago now, the confessant’s daugther, named
Sabina, was daily, without any reason, thrashed by the wife of his
abovementioned owner, and that his said mistress would not agree,
despite the confessant’s frequent entreaties, to sell her under any
circumstances but, instead of this, continually maltreated her. As,
towards the evening on a certain Saturday, when the confessant came home
from ploughing and asked his fellow slave Manica, who was the
confessant’s wife, for the used tea leaves of his mistress, this *meijd*
answered: “The *juffrouw* drank no tea today, but wine”. The said
*meijd* then narrated to him how that day his mistress, after first
undressing the said Sabina and having her spanned into a so-called
*poolsche bok*,^[^4]^ had again pitifully beaten her with a *sjambok*.
For which reason the said Sabina had fled from the house to behind a
corral, from where the confessant himself fetched her and brought her
into the kitchen. Moreover, as a result of this \[beating\], the said
woman slave then wanted to run away; however, the confessant told her
not to do so, but that she should rather go to her owner and beg him for
forgiveness. Wherefore the confessant’s fellow slaves, named Hans and
Patas, seeing the continual maltreatment of his aforementioned daughter
Sabina, often said to him: “You are such an old *jongen* and have helped
to pay off this farm, you can plough and do all sorts of other work so
well, and yet you can endure such maltreatment – if this *meijd* had
been our daughter, we would have taught the *baas* differently”. And
that, later on that very same Saturday evening, when both the confessant
and the other slaves were all in the kitchen, the confessant’s owner
entered it, holding a broomstick in his hand, and beat the *meijd*
Sabina anew. As a consequence of this the confessant, out of dejection
and grief, took up a knife lying on the table in the kitchen and gave
his aforementioned owner three stabs with it, without being able to say
where, seeing that the lamp was almost half burnt out. Upon this, the
confessant immediately took flight to above the ploughed fields of his
owner, where he remained for about one week, and thereafter went from
there to the mountains at Franschhoek, at which place he remained for,
as best he can remember, a period of sixteen years, after which he
proceeded from there to the mountain situated above the farm of Jan du
Busson, where he likewise remained some years, and where he was also,
some days ago, captured by some Europeans, taken to Stellenbosch and
then delivered into the hands of justice.

The confessant declares finally that during all of this time he had not
spoken to a single person, and had maintained himself with dassies and
fish, which he had caught with implements he manufactured to this end.

Thus confessed in the Dutch language, which the confessant speaks and
understands reasonably well, at the Cape of Good Hope on 13 January 1749
before the honourables Cornelis Eelders and Paul Artoijs, members of the
aforementioned honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed
the original of this, together with the confessant and me, the sworn
clerk.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, Reijnier van Madagascar,
who, after this, his given confession, had been read out word by word,
clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore not
desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it, and declares
all of the above to be the whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 14 January 1749 before the
honourables Cornelis Eelders and P. Artoijs, members of the
aforementioned honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed
the original of this, together with the confessant and me, the sworn
clerk.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, sworn clerk.

TRANSLATION

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable landdrost, Adriaan
van Schoor, by the burgher Pieter Reijnertsz., being of the following
contents, namely:

That on Friday, the 3^rd^ of this month, the testifier, who has been
working for some time on the farm of the farmer Jan du Buisson in
Draakensteijn, understood from the cattle herder of the said Jan du
Buisson that there must be deserters maintaining themselves in the
vicinity of the river or the mountain, which this *jongen* presumed
because he found lying there two small fish nets and some small snares
with which one could catch dassies or other small animals, as also that
he discovered up on the mountain, next to or beneath a rock, a hut made
from shrubs. That the deponent, together with the brother of the
aforesaid Jan du Buisson, named David du Buisson, and a person with the
name of Schellenberg, who is a *knecht* of the said Jan du Buisson, went
out that very afternoon to the mountain, taking with them, in order to
point out this hut, the aforementioned cattle herder and yet another
slave of Jan du Buisson. That not far from this hut, they kept watch
throughout the night and, when they searched it by day, they found
nothing but small snares which had been laid there. However, when they
searched together around the area, the aforementioned cattle herder
espied a *jongen*, of which he immediately warned the testifier and the
party with him. That they then all went there together, finding, about a
couple of hundred paces from the aforementioned hut, towards the
Draakensteijn mountains, a slave, who was at once asked by the burgher
David du Buisson if he was Reijnier of Matthijs Krugel, to which the
same answered: “Yes!”, adding that he had been supporting himself in the
mountains for about seven or eight years and that he had maintained
himself with trapped dassies and fish from the Berg River, whereupon
they took this slave Reijnier prisoner and brough him to the prison in
Stellenbosch.

There being nothing more to declare, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, being
willing, if it may be required, to subsequently confirm the aforegoing,
at any time.

Thus related at the office of the secretary in Stellenbosch on 8 January
1749 in the presence of the lay reader Abraham Faure and the messenger
of the court Hendrik van Ellewe, requested as witnesses hereto, who have
properly signed the original of this, together with the testifier and
me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] A. Schephausen, secretary.

[^1]: * Slaves were not permitted to marry until 1823, but in the
    eighteenth century those who formed permanent relationships were
    sometimes referred to as *vrouw* and *man*. The partnerships had no
    legal standing, but in the eyes of both the slaves and their owners,
    these bonds were matter of fact (see 1739 Cupido van Mallabaar, n.
    3). Although couples could be separated from each other or from
    their children, this did not always prevent stable emotional
    relationships. On slave marriages, see Worden 1985: 57-8; Shell
    1994: 288-89 and 320-24; and Schoeman 2001: 534-36 and 559-61; and,
    on slave families, Heese 1981. For other examples of marital or
    parent—child relationships, see 1721 Anthonij van Goa; 1741 Andries
    van Bengalen; 1742 Fortuijn van Bengalen; 1770 Jephta van de Caab;
    1786 Ceres van Madagascar; and 1792 Francois de Wet. *

[^2]: * ‘Zij comparante ook in alle die jaaren niet het minste
    vernoomen, nog gehoort heeft, niet beeter weetende, of dat reeds
    lang overleeden ware’ (she, the testifier, also in all these years
    did not learn, nor hear, the least thing \[about him\], not knowing
    any better whether he had long passed on), testimony of Manika van
    Bengal, CJ 357, ff. 11-12.*

[^3]: * CJ 31, f. 2. This sentence was, however, more lenient than the
    death penalty that was usually imposed on slaves who had attacked
    their owners. *

[^4]:  The *poolsche bok* was a way of tying somebody up: the hands are
    tied together and put over the drawn-up knees, after which a stick
    or something like it is inserted under the knees and across the
    arms, thereby rendering a person totally defenseless. Slaves were
    usually undressed before being tied up like this and then whipped.
    For an explanation of the name and for further examples of this
    vicious punishment, see Franken 1953: 109-12. The punishment had
    been in use at the Cape since the seventeenth century and was also
    known in colonial Surinam (Stedman 1992: 556 and 665). Franken
    suggests that it might have developed from a punishment meted out on
    ships.
