1749 SALAOOS VAN SAMBOUWA

*Here Cape Town slaves plan to steal flour from one of their owners and
to sell it to an exiled Chinese person in the town. They are caught
red-handed by the nightwatchmen and apprehended. The case gives a
glimpse of the Chinese *bandieten* (convicts) exiled to the Cape from
Batavia, some of whom, such as Limoeijko, had served their sentences and
were ‘free Chinese’. The authorities suspected the Chinese community in
Cape Town of being actively involved in smuggling and the handling of
stolen goods.[^1] Certainly these slaves knew where to bring their
flour, and Limoeijko’s claims of innocence were not believed and he was
punished along with the slaves.*[^2]

**CJ 357** Criminele Process Stukken, 1749, ff. 428-29.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie des Casteels de Goede Hoop, den Chinees
Limoeijko, oud volgens gissing 40 jaaren, denwelken, ter requisitie van
den heer Independent Fiscaal Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, confesseerde
hoe waar is:

Dat nu agt dagen geleeden, of tusschen laatstleeden Dingsdag en
Woensdags nagt, sonder de nette uur te kunnen noemen, aan sijn
confessants deur geklopt werdende, hij confessant dierhalven, vermits
vermeijnde dat het volk was die hem confessant quamen roepen om met hun
te gaan visschen, sijne deur geopent heeft, dog wanneer hij confessant
alsdoen ontwaarde dat het een swarte jongen was, bij denwelken datelijk
nog een andere jonge quam, die een sak met meel droeg en hetselve aan
hem verkopen wilden, teffens ook daarmeede eeven voor aan in sijn huijs
quamen; heeft hij confessant, als sulx niet kopen willende, die jongens
van daar willen doen weggaan, dog intusschen dat hij confessant met die
jongens dienthalven in gesprek was, quamen voor sijn confessants deur
meede twee ratelwagts, dewelke het aldaar voorgevallene ontdekkende, die
twee jongens voorts van daar weggenomen en naar de tronk gebragt hebben,
sonder dat hij confessant iets verder dienaangaande weet.

Betuijgende denselven nog dat aan de ratelwagts geen geld gepresenteerde
heeft om van het voorgevallen stil te swijgen.

Aldus geconfesseert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 5^e^ November 1749, voor
d’ edele Am. Decker en B. Artoijs, leeden uijt den edelagtbaare Raad van
Justitie, voormeld, die de minute deeses, beneevens den confessant ende
mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

**CJ 787** Sententiën, 1744-1749, ff. 360-64.

Nademaal uijt de vrijwillige, gerecolleerde confessies van Salaoos van
Sambouwa, lijfeijgen van den burger Gijsbert Rogier, oud 28, December
van Sambouwa, slaaf van den baas der scheepstimmerlieden Barend van
Dockum, oud 36, Baatjoe van Maccassar, toebehoorende den burger Jurriaan
Jansz., oud 25, en den al hier gebannenen Chinees Limoeijko, oud naar
gissing 40 jaaren, alle thans ’s heeren gevangens, en andere stucken te
processe gevoegt, het den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie des Casteels de
Goede Hoop, duijdelijk is komen te blijken:

Dat den eersten gevangen op Sondag, sijnde geweest den 26^e^ der
gepasseerden maand October, met den tweeden en derden gevangens afspraak
genomen hebbende om dien eijgensten nagt aan ’t huijs van sijns eerste
gevangens lijfheer te komen en hem aldaar eenig meel te helpen steelen,
hij eerste gevangen sig daarop alleenig na de wooning van den vierden
gevangen vervoegt, en aan denselven het meel te koop gepresenteerd
heeft, sonder nogtans met denselven geen vaste prijs te kunnen bedingen,
ten aansien hij vierde gevangen eerst sien wilde hoeveel meel den
eersten gevangen wel soude aanbrengen; dog sij drie eerste gevangens,
door het opkomend slegten reegenagtig weer, dien Sondag nagt hun
diefagtig voorneemen niet kunnende volbrengen, heeft den tweeden
gevangen op Dingsdag daaraanvolgende, naar dat alvoorens den derden
gevangen dien selfden middag gewaarschouwt hadde om dien eijgensten
avond, ter uijtvoering van hun voorneemen, bij hem aan strand te sullen
komen, sig des avonds over thien uuren uijt de agterdeur van sijn
lijfheer begeeven bij den, op strand na hem wagtende, derden gevangen,
ende met hun beijden vervolgens na ’t huijs van den burger Gijsbert
Rogier gegaan sijnde, sijn sij langs een, door den tweeden gevangen van
sijn lijfheer meede genomene bamboesstock, over de muur, also de deur
van de gang toe was, op de plaats geklommen, en vervolgens in de
combuijs, welkers deur maar op de klink was, gegaan; als wanneer den
eersten gevangen door hun, volgens genome afspraak, wacker gemaakt
sijnde, sig met den derden gevangen, terwijl den tweeden gevangen onder
in de combuijs op schildwagt bleef staan, na de solder begeeven en met
denselven, bij klijne parthijen, in 3 à 4 sacken omtrent een en een
halve sack gebuijlt meel daar afgehaalt heeft, begeevende den eersten
gevangen, nadat alvoorens de deur van de gang geopent had, sig met de
volle en den derden gevangen met de halve sack van ’t voormelde
gestolene meel, mitsgaders den tweeden gevangen met de bamboes stock,
hun op weg na de wooning van den vierden gevangen. Ende hij eerste
gevangen met den ratelwagt Willem van Dijk, die hem onderweegs ontdeckt
en bijgehouden hadde, ter voormelde wooning aangekomen sijnde, is die
sack met meel ten eersten door hem vierde gevangen aangenomen en in het
voorhuijs besijden de deur needergeset geworden, hebbende den derden
gevangen, op ’t bemercken van onraad, de sack die hij op sijn schouder
droeg, voor de deur van hem vierde gevangen neer geworpen, en sig
vervolgens met de vlugt geretireert, terwijl den eersten en tweeden
gevangen door voormelde ratelwagt Van Dijk, met behulp van sijn macker
Booijens Claassen, die immiddels daarbij gekomen was, dien eijgensten
nagt nog geapprehendeert, en daags daaraan neevens den derde en vierden
gevangens, in handen der justitie overgeleevert sijn geworden.

Ende dewijl sulk een gepleegde diefte en heelinge van dien, in een land
alwaar de justitie stiptelijk geoeffent word niet te dulden is, maar
daarenteegens, ten spiegel en afschrik van andere alsulke booswigten,
exemplaarlijk moet werden gestraft.

So is ’t, dat den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie voormeld, ten dage
dienende,

aandagtelijk geleesen en overwoogen hebbende, den schriftelijken
crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie door den heer Independent Fiscaal
Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn *nomine officii *op ende jeegens den
gevangens gedaan ende genomen, mitsgaders geleth, so op de vrijwillige
confessies van de drie eerste gevangens, als op de andere stucken daar
neevens gevoegt, alle in judicio behoorlijk gerecolleert, voorts agt
gegeeven te hebben op al hetgeene ter materie was dienende en haar Edel
Agtbaarens eenigsints konde doen moveeren, doende regt uijt name ende
van weegens de hoogmogende Heeren Staaten Generaal der Vereenigde
Neederlanden, mitsgaders van sijne doorlugtigste hoogheid den Heere
Prince van Orangjen, als derselver Erfstadthouder, Capitain en Admiraal
Generaal, alle vier de gevangens: Salaoos en December, bijde van
Sambouwa, Baatjoe van Macasser en den Chinees Limoeijko hebben
gecondemneert, gelijk haar Edel Agtbaarens deselve condemneeren mits
deesen: om gebragt te werden, ter plaatse alwaar men alhier gewoon is
crimineele sententiën te executeeren, aldaar den scherpregter
overgeleevert sijnde, den eersten gevangen Salaoos van Sambouwa eerst
met de strop om de hals onder de galg te pronk gestelt te werden,
vervolgens, neevens den tweeden, derden en vierden gevangen, aan een
paal gebonden sijnde, met roeden op de bloote rugge strengelijk
gegeesselt, gebrandmerkt, en de drie eerste gevangens: Salaoos, December
en Baatjoe, dus hare lijfheeren, mits betaalende de costen, weederom te
huijs gesonden te werden, mitsgaders den vierden gevangen Limoeijko
weederom in de ketting aan ’s edele Compagnies gemeene wercken voor al
sijn leeven geconfinieert blijven; met condemnatie van alle vier de
gevangens in de costen en misen van Justitie, en ontsegging van den
verdere ofte ander gedane eiijsch van den heer Officier ten opsigte van
alle de gevangens.

Aldus gedaan en gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 13^e^
November 1749, mitsgaders gepronuntieert ende geexecuteert den 15^e^
daaraanvolgende

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] H. Swellengrebel.

\[get.\] R. Tulbagh, J. Meinertzhagen, Hendk. de Ruijter, R.S. Allemann,
Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Corns. Eelders, Js. de Grandpreez, Am. Decker,
D. d’Aillij, Jn. Raeck, P. Artoijs, Js. Blanckenberg.

Mij present, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, the Chinese Limoeijko, 40
years old at a guess, who, on the requisition of the honourable
independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, confesses it to be true:

That eight days ago now, or the night between last Tuesday and
Wednesday, being unable to name the exact hour, the confessant opened
his door when somebody knocked on it, since he thought that it was
*volk* who came to call him to go fishing with them.[^3] However, he
then noticed that it was a black *jongen*, to whom there instantly came
yet another *jongen*, carrying a sack of flour, and who wanted to sell
it to him, at the same time also coming with the flour just inside the
front of his house. The confessant, seeing that he did not wish to buy
this, wanted to have these *jongens* gone from there, but while he was
talking to these *jongens* to this end, there also arrived in front of
his door two men of the *ratelwacht* who then, uncovering what was
happening there, took these two *jongens* away from there and took them
to the prison, without him, the confessant, knowing anything further
about this.

He also declares that he did not present any money to the men of the
*ratelwacht* in order to keep quiet about what happened.

Thus confessed at the Cape of Good Hope on 5 November 1749 before the
honourables Am. Decker and B. Artoijs, members of the aforementioned
honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed the original of
this, together with the confessant and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Since, from the voluntary, verified confessions of Salaoos van Sambouwa,
bondsman of the burgher Gijsbert Rogier, age 28, December van Sambouwa,
slave of the chief ship’s carpenter Barend van Dockum, age 36, Baatjoe
van Macassar, belonging to the burgher Juriaan Jansz, age 25, and the
Chinese banished here, Limoeijko, 40 years old at a guess, all currently
their honours’ prisoners; and from the other documents produced in the
case, it has come to appear evident to the honourable Council of Justice
of this Castle of Good Hope:

That on Sunday, which was the 26^th^ of the past month October, the
first prisoner made an arrangement with the second and third prisoner to
come to the house of the prisoner’s owner on that very night and to
assist him there in stealing some flour. That the first prisoner then
went on his own to the home of the fourth prisoner and offered to sell
him the flour, without being able, though, to agree with the same on a
fixed price, seeing that the fourth prisoner first wanted to see how
much flour the first prisoner would bring. Because of the bad weather
which developed, the first three prisoners could not bring about their
thievish intention that Sunday night; however, on the following Tuesday,
the second prisoner – after first having warned the third prisoner that
same afternoon to come to him on the beach that very evening for the
execution of their intention – went after 10 o’clock at night from the
back door of his owner’s \[house\] to the beach, where the third
prisoner was awaiting him, and then, both of them went to the house of
the burgher Gijsbert Rogier and, since the door of the alley was locked,
climbed over the wall into the yard by means of a bamboo stick, which
the second prisoner had brought along from his owner’s, and then went
into the kitchen, whose door was only on the latch; which is when the
first prisoner, having been roused by them in accordance with their
arrangement, proceeded with the third prisoner to the attic, while the
second prisoner remained as sentry down in the kitchen, and with the
same he took down from there by small lots, in three to four bags, about
one and a half sacks of sieved flour. The first prisoner, after first
opening the door of the alley, went with a whole sack and the third
prisoner with half a sack of the aforementioned stolen flour, besides
the second prisoner with the bamboo stick, on their way to the home of
the fourth prisoner. And when the first prisoner arrived, with the
*ratelwacht* Willem van Dijk, who had discovered and followed him along
the way, at the aforementioned house, the sack of flour was immediately
accepted by the fourth prisoner and put down besides the door in the
*voorhuijs*. The third prisoner, upon noticing that something was wrong,
threw down the sack which he was carrying on his shoulder before the
door of the fourth prisoner, and got away by fleeing, while the first
and second prisoners were apprehended that very same night by the
aforementioned *ratelwacht* Van Dijk with the help of his colleague,
Booijens Claassen, who had arrived there in the meantime; and, together
with the third and fourth prisoners, were delivered the day thereafter
into the hands of justice.

And since the perpetration of such a theft and the receipt of stolen
goods cannot be tolerated in a country where justice is properly
practised, but should, on the contrary, be punished in an exemplary
fashion, as a warning and a deterrent to other such malefactors.

Thus it is that the honourable Council of Justice, serving today, having
carefully read and considered the written *crimineelen eijsch ende
conclusie*, drawn up and delivered for and against the prisoners by the
honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, in his
official capacity, as well as having noted both the voluntary
confessions of the first three prisoners and the other documents added
to it, all properly verified in court, besides having heeded everything
that served the case and could possibly have moved their honours,
practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty
Lords States General of the United Netherlands, as well as his most
serene highness, the Lord Prince of Orange, as its hereditary
Stadholder, Captain and Admiral General, having judged all four of the
prisoners, Salaoos and December, both van Sambouwa, Baatjoe van Macassar
and the Chinese Limoeijko, is sentencing them with this: to be taken to
the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here, there to
be handed over to the executioner, the first prisoner, Salaoos van
Sambouwa, first to be exposed with the rope around his neck under the
gallows, then, together with the second, third and fourth prisoners to
be bound to a stake, to be severely scourged with rods on their bare
backs, branded, and the first three prisoners, Salaoos, December and
Baatjoe, thus to be sent home again to their owners, provided they pay
the costs, besides the fourth prisoner, Limoeijko, who is yet again to
be confined in chains on the honourable Company’s public works for his
whole life; with sentencing all four prisoners to the costs and
expenditure of justice; and denying the further or otherwise drawn-up
*eijsch* of the honourable Officer with regard to all the
prisoners.[^4]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 13 November 1749,
as also pronounced and executed on the 15^th^ thereupon.

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] H. Swellengrebel.

\[signed\] R. Tulbagh, J. Meinertzhagen, Hendk. de Ruijter, R.S.
Allemann, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Corns. Eelders, Js. de Grandpreez,
Am. Decker, D. d’Aillij, Jn. Raeck, P. Artoijs, Js. Blanckenberg.

In my presence, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

[^1]: * Certainly they were very active in the retail trade which, given
    Company regulations to restrict private trading, meant that their
    activities constantly bordered on the illegal and they frequently
    appeared in the criminal court records. For discussion of this and
    other cases involving Chinese smugglers, see Alexander 2003 and, on
    the Chinese community in general in Cape Town, Armstrong 1997. The
    number of Chinese *bandieten* sent to the Cape increased in the
    1740s as labour was required to build the projected breakwater at
    Mouille Point. Alexander speculates that Limoeijko may have been
    more impoverished than some of his predecessors, as shown by his
    willingness to deal in stolen flour. *

[^2]: * Salaoos was displayed standing under the gallows with a rope
    around his neck, and was then, with the other three, whipped and
    branded. The three slaves were sent back to their owners, while
    Limoeijko was sentenced to labour in chains on the Company’s public
    works for life, CJ 31, ff. 99-102. This was more lenient than the
    death sentence for Salaoos, the ten years in chains for December and
    Baatjoe and the life imprisonment in the Company battery for
    Limoeijko that were recommended in the *eijsch. *The *eijsch *and
    the testimonies of the accused and the burgher *ratelwacht* are in
    CJ 357, ff. 415-33. *

[^3]:  Fishing was an important economic activity among the free black
    community at the Cape and small fishing boats were often
    collectively owned by several families (Elphick & Shell 1989: 223;
    Mentzel 1925: 88).

[^4]:  See note 2 above.
