1.  **APRIL VAN DE CAAB**

*April van de Caab ran away from his master but was obliged after some
time to take up employment on another farm, passing himself off as a
*Bastaard-Hottentot*.[^1] He was recognised by Khoi workers and
returned to his master, but on the way back escaped and stabbed one of
the Khoi. *

*The case reveals the problems faced by runaway slaves, and the
complexity of their interactions with Khoi and other slaves whom they
met when on the run. It is striking that April, as a locally born slave,
did not attempt to leave the colony, as did many slaves who had known
another life before being brought to the Cape, but rather stayed in the
only region with which he was familiar.[^2] *

**CJ 788** Sententiën, 1750-1755, ff. 103-8.[^3]

Aangesien April van de Caab, lijfeijgen van den landbouwer Pieter
Therron \[*sic*\], oud naar gissing 20 jaaren, thans ’s heeren gevangen,
buijten pijn ofte dwang van banden, van ijsers, dan wel de minste
bedrijging van dien, vrijwillig heeft beleeden, ende het den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements ook evidentelijk is
koomen te blijken:

Dat den gevangen, nu een maand of drie geleeden, van sijn meester
gevlugt en na eenigen tijd rondswervens gekoomen sijnde ter plaatse van
den landbouwer Jan Smit, aan de Honingberg geleegen, hij gevangen sig
aldaar, dewijl bij niemand bekent was, voor een bastaert Hottentot heeft
uijt gegeeven, werdende nogtans weijnig tijds daarna door den Hottentot
Willem verkent, en door denselven, neevens sijn broeder Jantje,
mitsgaders nog drie andere Hottentotten, alle bij den landbouwer Lourens
Pretorius woonagtig, ter plaatse van gemelde Jan Smit gevangen genoomen
en na die van gedagte Pretorius gebragt, vanwaar voorseijde Hottentotten
Willem en Jantje den gevangen vervolgens des anderen daags, ter ordre
van voorseijde Pretorius, gevleugelt hebben weggebragt ten eijnde
denselven bij sijn lijfheer, aan het Roodesant woonagtig, weederom te
huijs te brengen, dog ’s nademiddaags onder de cloof van ’t Roodesant
den schapewagter van den landbouwer Gerrit van Hoeting, Fortuijn van
Boegies genaamt, ontmoet hebbende, sijde boovengemelde Willem: Laat ons
hier een stuck brood vraagen, jk heb honger, krijgende hij Willem, op de
gedaane afvraging, soo wel als geciteerde Jantje en den gevangen, van
voorseijde Fortuijn ijder een stuck brood en vleesch, en nadat sij het
geschimmelde van het brood met een mes afgeschraapt en gedaan hadden met
eeten, stopte meergemelde Willem een pijp tabak, onder ’twelke den
gevangen, die digt bij voormelde schapewagter was sittende en denselven
in ’t Maleitsch een mes om brood te snijden gevraagt hebbende, nadat van
denselven een mes bekoomen hadde, sijde: Daar is een waagen, maar die
rijd uijt het pad, hetgeen door gemelde Willem en Jantje, dewelke
beweerden dat de waagen niet uijt, maar wel in het pad was, den gevangen
wierd teegengesprooken en daarover met hem gestreeden; ende den
gevangen, die overeijnd stond, sig vervolgens gelaatende alsof weeder
wilde gaan needersitten, heeft hij gevangen alsdoen, nadat het touw,
waarmeede gevleugel was, onder ’t praaten aan stucken gesneeden had, den
Hottentot Willem, die plat op de grond sat op het onverwagtst met het in
de hand hebbend mes, onder ’t seggen van: Hij, een steek in de
linkersijde onder de borst toegebragt, en sig so voort, het mes in de
wond laatende steeken, op de vlugt begeeven, agtervolgt werdende door
gemelde schapewagter Fortuijn nadat denselven het mes uijt het lighaam
van dien Hottentot had gehaalt, sonder den gevangen egter te hebben
kunnen magtig werden; waarna voormelde Hottentot Willem, door behulp van
twee slaaven van den landbouwer Gerrit van Hoeting, teegens den avond
ter plaatse van denselven gebragt, en door den landbouwer August Willem
Eens, so goed als hij konde, verbonden sijnde ’s anderen daags
agtermiddaags is koomen te overlijden.

Sijnde den gevangen naar nog eenige dagen rondgesworven hebben,
insgelijx geapprehendeert, en dus in handen der justitie overgeleevert
geworden.

Alle hetwelke sijnde een fervoeijlijk gedoente, ’tgeene in een
welgestelde regeering geensints kan nog mag gedult, maar daarenteegens,
ten spiegel en afschrick van andere diergelijke schurken, exemplaarlijk
moet werden gestraft.

Weshalven so is ’t, dat den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, voormelde,
ten dage diendende, met nadruck geleesen en overwoogen hebbende den
schriftelijken crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie door den Landdrost van
Stellenbosch en Drakensteijn, sieur Adriaan van Schoor, *ex officio*, op
ende jeegens den gevangen gedaan ende genoomen, mitsgaders geleth op des
gevangens vrijwillige confessie en andere stucken daarneevens gevoegt,
alle in judicio behoorlijk gerecolleert, voorts op alle het geene ter
saake dienende was en haare edelagtbaarens eenigsints konde doen
moveeren, regt doende uijt naame ende van weegens de hoogmogende heeren
Staaten Generaal der Vereenigde Neederlanden en mitsgaders van sijne
doorlugtigste hoogheid den Heere Prince van Orange en Nassau, als
Erfstadthouder, Capitain en Admiraal Generaal van de Republicq, den
gevangen April van de Caab hebben gecondemneert, gelijk haar
edelagtbaarens denselven condemneeren mits deesen, om gebragt te werden
ter plaatse alwaar men alhier gewoon is crimineele sententiën te
executeeren, en aldaar aan den scherpregter overgeleevert sijnde, met de
coorde aan de galg soodanig gestraft te werden, dat er de dood naar
volgt, voorts desselfs doode lighaam naar ’t buijten geregt gesleept, en
aldaar weeder aan de galg opgehangen sijnde, dus te verblijven totdat
door de lugt en de voogelen des heemels sal sijn verteert, met
condemnatie in de costen en misen van justitie.

Aldus gedaan en gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 8^e^
Junij 1752, mitsgaders gepronuntieert ende g’executeert den 10^e^
daaraanvolgende.

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] R. Tulbagh.

\[get.\] S. Swellengrebel, P. Reede van Oudshoorn, J. Meinertzhagen,
R.S. Alleman, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Corns. Eelders, Js. de
Grandpreez, Am. Decker, D. d’Aillij, Jn. Raeck, Hk. vn. dr. Heijden, Jn.
Haszingh.

Mij present, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Since April van de Caab, bondsman of the farmer Pieter Therron
\[*sic*\], 20 years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoner,
has voluntarily confessed, without any torture or coercion of bonds, of
irons, or even the least threat of suchlike, and since it has also come
to appear evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this
government:

That the prisoner, now almost three months ago, fled from his master
and, after wandering about for some time, got to the farm of the farmer
Jan Smit, situated at the Honingberg, where the prisoner, as he was
unknown to everybody, passed himself off as a *Bastaard Hottentot*. Yet,
some time hereafter, he was recognised by the Hottentot Willem and taken
prisoner on the farm of the said Jan Smit by him and his brother Jantje,
as well as three other Hottentots, all resident with the farmer Lourens
Pretorius, and taken to the farm of the said Pretorius, from where the
aforesaid Hottentots Willem and Jantje then, on the order of the
aforesaid Pretorius, took away the trussed prisoner the following day in
order to return him home again to his master, resident at Roodesant.
However, having met the shepherd of the farmer Gerrit van Hoeting, by
the name of Fortuijn van Boegies, in the afternoon in the kloof of
Roodesant, the aforementioned Willem said: “Let us ask for a piece of
bread here, I am hungry”. After requesting this, Willem, as well as the
said Jantje and the prisoner, each got a piece of bread and meat from
the aforesaid Fortuijn and, after having scraped off the mould from the
bread with a knife and after they had finished their meal, the
aforementioned Willem filled a pipe with tobacco. While doing so, the
prisoner, who was sitting close to the aforesaid shepherd and had asked
him in Malay[^4] for a knife to cut the bread with, and after having
received the knife from him, said: “There is a wagon, but it is riding
off the road”, which was denied by the said Willem and Jantje, who
claimed that the wagon was not off but actually on the road, and about
which they argued with him. The prisoner, who was standing up, thereupon
pretended to be sitting down again, which is when – after he had cut
loose the rope with which he was tied up while they were talking – he
unexpectedly, saying: “Hey!”, gave the Hottentot Willem, who was sitting
flat on the ground, a stab in his left side under his chest; and then,
leaving the knife sticking from the wound, took flight, being pursued by
the shepherd Fortuijn after the latter had first taken out the knife
from the body of the Hottentot, without being able to catch up with the
prisoner. After which the aforesaid Hottentot Willem, after being taken
to the farm of the farmer Gerrit van Hoeting with the help of two of his
slaves and being bandaged by the farmer August Willem Eens, as well as
he could, passed away in the afternoon of the following day.

The prisoner, after having roamed around for some days, was finally
apprehended and thus fell into the hands of justice.

All of which is an abominable affair, which cannot be, nor should be,
tolerated in a well-established government, but on the contrary ought to
be punished as an example and deterrent to other similar scoundrels.

Wherefore it is, that the aforementioned honourable Council of Justice,
serving today, having read and considered with care the written
*crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and
against the prisoner by the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Drakenstein,
*Sieur* Adriaan van Schoor, in his official capacity, as well as having
noted the prisoner’s voluntary confession and the other documents added
to it, all properly verified in court, and everything further that
served the case and could possibly have moved their honours; practising
justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States
General of the United Netherlands as well as his illustrious highness,
the Lord Prince of Orange and Nassau, as hereditary Stadtholder, Captain
and Admiral General of the Republic, and having judged the prisoner
April van de Caab, is sentencing him with this: to be taken to the place
where criminal sentences are usually executed here, there to be handed
over to the executioner, and to be punished with the rope on the gallows
so that death will follow; further that his dead body be dragged to the
outer place of execution and there, yet again, hanged upon the gallows,
to remain thus until being consumed by the air and the birds of heaven,
with sentencing to the costs and expenditure of justice.[^5]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 8^\ ^June 1752, as
well as pronounced and executed on the 10^th^ thereupon.

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

\[signed\] S. Swellengrebel, P. Reede van Oudshoorn, J. Meinertzhagen,
R.S. Alleman, Ns. Heijning, Cl. Brand, Corns. Eelders, Js. de
Grandpreez, Am. Decker, D. d’Aillij, Jn. Raeck, Hk. vn. dr. Heijden, Jn.
Haszingh.

In my presence, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

[^1]:  Bastaard-Hottentot *was the name given to the offspring of Khoi
    and slave parents (Elphick & Shell 1989: 202). Those with slave
    fathers were not legally enslaved, since slave status descended from
    the mother, but many formed part of the labour force of the farming
    districts. In 1775, they were formally indentured until the age of
    25. Their growing numbers from the middle of the eighteenth century
    made the authorities concerned that escaped slaves were able to pass
    themselves off as *Bastaard-Hottentotten,* as in this case, and they
    were made to carry passes, as were slaves and free blacks, when
    legally away from their place of employment (see 1786 Augustus van
    de Caab et al., n. 8). This was the basis of the notorious South
    African pass laws, Worden 1985: 58, 127; Shell 1994: 141, 267; and
    Penn 1999: 148-49. For other examples of slaves passing themselves
    off as *Bastaard-Hottentotten*, see Heese 1994: 106-7.*

[^2]: * The slow rate of creolisation (that is, the predominance of
    locally born slaves over imported ones) at the Cape meant that the
    large majority of slaves in the VOC period were outsiders and had
    known a life before enslavement. This changed, especially after the
    abolition of the slave trade in 1808, affecting the character of
    slave resistance: instead of running away to escape from the colony,
    slaves began to demand improvement of their condition, or outright
    freedom, within the Cape as the only world that they knew (for this
    argument in transatlantic slave societies in this period, see
    Genovese 1979; for the Cape, Ross 1983: 96-116).*

[^3]:  Further documentation for this case includes the *eijsch* and the
    testimonies of Jantje and August Willem Eens, as well as the
    interrogations of April van de Caab and Fortuijn van Boegies, CJ
    360, ff. 239-56. This evidence is contained in the *sententie* given
    here.

[^4]:  An interesting indication that a locally born slave knew (some)
    Malay and could therefore communicate with a slave from the
    Indonesian archipelago. On the use of Malay as a contact language
    between slaves, along with Creole Portuguese, see 1775 Moses van de
    Caab.

[^5]:  This was the sentence recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 360, f.
    242. At his sentencing, April van de Caab claimed that he had not
    intended to kill Willem. He was nonetheless found guilty of murder
    and sentenced as above, CJ 34, ff. 43-5.
