1.  RACHEL VAN DE CAAB

*This is a complex and intriguing case of attempted poisoning of an
owner by her slaves.[^1] Rachel collaborated with her fellow slave
Joseph in obtaining mercury from the Company apothecary, which they
placed in the water glass of their owner’s wife, although Rachel claimed
not to have understood the implications of this. The plot failed when
the mistress noticed something wrong. Both Joseph and Rachel were
subsequently tortured by their owner, and eventually confessed. Joseph
hanged himself, and Rachel was sentenced to a public whipping and to be
placed in chains for the rest of her life.[^2] *

*However, the court also ordered that Rachel be sold, never again to be
owned by Van Reenen or his family. Although it believed that Rachel and
Joseph had committed a punishable crime, it also brought Van Reenen to
justice for maltreating his slaves, since he did not have the permission
of the fiscal to extract confessions from them and he had also concealed
the facts about his actions in Rachel’s court case. The fiscal was sure
that Van Reenen had driven Joseph to his suicide. He was fined 1,000
guilders, with costs. [^3] *

**CJ 363** Criminele Process Stukken, Deel 2, 1754, ff. 6-9v.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, Rachel van de Caab,
slavin van den burger Jacobus van Rheenen de jonge, oud 20 à 21 jaaren,
dewelke, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscaal Pieter Reede
van Oudshoorn, confesseerde hoe waar is:

Dat nu een groote maand voorleeden, sonder den netten dag of datum te
weeten, der confessante meede slaaf Joseph, die hem gisteren morgen
verhangen hebbende is bevonden geworden, aan haar heeft gevraagt of sij
niet wist waar dat quik te koop was, waarmede, hij sijde, knoopen en
spiegels te willen schoon maaken; op ’twelke de confessante denselven
ten antwoord gegeeven hebbende dat dat niet wiste, wierd door gedagte
Joseph daarop hervat: Basta maar![^4]

Dat voormelde Joseph eenige dagen daarna haar confessante voor de tweede
maal na quik gevraagd en teffens aangesegt heeft om seekere slave jonge,
genaamt Jacob, dewelke bij den apothecar van ’s edele Compagnies
hospitaal bescheijden is, om eenig quik te vraagen of, in gevalle die
niet hadde, als dan de slavemeijd van den oud tweeden opperchirurgijn
Dirk Wijdenaar, Emerentia genaamd, daarover te spreeken; heeft sij
confessante voormelde Jacob om eenig quik aangesprooken, sonder egter
van gemelde slaaf Jacob iets te hebben ontfangen, van ’twelke sij
confessante eerst aan gedagte Joseph verslag hebbende gedaan, heeft
meergedagte Joseph haar alsdoen opnieuws gesegt dat sij gerepte
Emerentia maar daarom versoeken soude: dies sij hetselve ook gedaan en
van die meijd vervolgens, ’s daags voor Kersdag jongstleeden, een vlesje
met wat quik bekoomen heeft; welk vlesje de confessante aan voormelde
Joseph heeft behandigt, als wanneer gedagte Joseph haar confessante
versogten om hem te waarschouwen wanneer haare lijfvrouw water eijschte,
welk versoek denselven ook tot diverse maalen herhaald heeft.

Dat hierop, ’s Vrijdags naar ’t Nieuwe Jaar, zijnde geweest den 4 deeser
maand Januarij, voormelde haare lijfvrouw, ’s avonds de klocke omtrent
neegen uuren, in de maaneschijn voor de huijsdeur sittende, van de
confessante een glas water geëijscht hebbende, sij confessante oversulx
daarvan aen voormelde, op de agterplaats weesende, slaaf Joseph heeft
kennis gegeeven, denwelken daarop, soo ras de confessante uijt de kelder
een glas gehaald, hetselve in de combuijs schoon gemaakt en vol water
gedaan hadde, uijt het voormelde, hem overgegeven hebbende, vlesje wat
quik in dat glas gegooten heeft, met bijvoeging: Geeft dat maar aan de
juffrouw, die is soo valsch en sal na de huijshouding soo niet kunnen
sien.

Dat de confessante dat water aen gemelde haare lijfvrouw overhandigt
hebbende, en door deselve onder ’t drincken bespeurd werdende, dat er
iets in ’t glas sijn moeste, heeft deselve aan haar confessante gevraagt
wat dat er in het glas was, dan de confessante daarop geantwoord
hebbende: Niet met al!, en teffens gedagte glas van haare lijfvrouw
weederom wilde wegneemen, maar ’tselve, naar sulx bij de kaars besigtigt
te hebben, heeft gaan bergen; weshalven sij confessante voormelde Joseph
ging vraagen wat dat hij gedaan hadde, dan, dewijl gedagte Joseph haar
daarop het antwoord gaf: Nonje sal verteeren als een geraamte!, is sy
confessante alsdoen soo bevreest geworden, dat sulx aan gemelde haare
lijfvrouw niet heeft derven bekent maaken.

Dat dien eijgensten avond gemelde haar lijfheer die saak naauwkeurig
ondersogt en aan haar confessante, soo wel als aan voormelde Joseph,
gevraagt heeft wat dat in ’t glas onder ’t water gedaan had, en vermits
de confessante soo min als voorgemelde Joseph niets bekennen wilde,
heeft gemelde haar lijfheer gedagte Joseph naar de tronk laaten brengen
en daarop, des volgenden daags, aldaar laaten afstraffen, sonder egter
ook alsdoen bekent te hebben.

Dat hierop, des volgenden Sondags avond, geciteerde haar lijfheer
voormelde Joseph de handen en voeten door de stoel heen tesaamen
gebonden, in de poolsche bok gespannen, en dusdanig wel een uur lang op
een stoel heeft laaten sitten, in verwagting dat dien slaaf daar door
tot bekentenis soude koomen, dog vergeefs, seggende alleenlijk dat sij
confessante daarvan weeten moeste; sulx de confessante door gemelde haar
lijfheer op gelijke wijse vastgebonden geworden sijnde, insgelijx wel
een en een half uur lang soodanig heeft moeten blijven sitten, sonder
egter dien avond uijt vreese en benaauwtheijd het minste van ’t
voorengemelde bekent te hebben.

Dat op Maandag daaraanvolgende de confessante, naar dat se in de
poolsche bok gespannen en met de rottang op ’t bloote lijf geslagen
geworden was, eijndelijk aan haar lijfheer, meergemelde Van Rheenen,
alle ’t voorengesegden, dat sij nog voor waar bekent, gulhartig gestand
gedaan heeft. Dog, seedert laatstgemelde Vrijdag, zijnde geweest den
4^e^ Januarij deeses jaars, gemelde Van Rheenen gedagte Joseph dagelijx
daarna gevraagt hebbende, dog niet eerder ’t minste uijt denselven
brengen mogen, dan op Donderdag laatstleeden, als wanneer denselven aan
gedagte Van Rheenen uijtdruckelijk gesegt heeft dat hij dat quik onder
’t waater had gegooten; dog hadde sij confessante van desselfs intentie
of reedenen, die hem daartoe soude bewogen hebben, niets gehoord. En
terwijl sulx bekentenis dien jongen Joseph vrijwillig op sijn kniën
heeft gedaan, en daarbij om vergiffenis gebeeden, heeft aen hem gemelde
Van Rheenen nog geantwoord, dat hij hem het wel vergeeven wilde, maar
hem egter verkoopen soude.

Laatstelijk betuijgde de confessante niet eerder te hebben geweeten dat
sij, dan wel Joseph, daarmeede iets quaads gedaan, nog iets quaads
geïntendeert heeft, dan naar van Joseph verstaen te hebben, dat haare
lijfvrouw daarvan soude verteeren, en daarom was sij bang geworden om
eerder iets daarvan te bekennen.

Aldus geconfesseerd aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 12^e^ Januarij 1754,
voor d’ edele R.S. Alleman en H.J. Prehn, leeden uijt welgemelde
edelagtbaare Raade, die de minute deeses, beneevens de confessante ende
mij, geswore clercq, behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] L.F. Haake, geswore clercq.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, de slavinne Ragel
van de Caab, dewelke deese, haare confessie, van woorde tot woorde klaar
en duijdelijk voorgeleesen weesende, verklaarden daarbij volkomen te
persisteeren, niet begeerende dat er iets meer bijgevoegt ofte van
gedaan werden sal; als alleenig dat den slaaf Joseph, soo wel als de
confessante, door haar lijfheer op een stoel gebonden, maar niet in de
poolsche bok gespannen is geworden, betuijgende voorts al het
voorenstaende de suijvere waarheijd te sijn.

Aldus gerecolleerd in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 17^e^ Januarij 1754,
voor d’ edele R.S. Alleman en P. Artoijs, leeden uijt voormelde
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, die de minuten deeses beneevens de
confessante ende mij, secretaris, behoorlijk hebben ondertekend.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

**CJ 363** Criminele Process Stukken, Deel 2, 1754, ff. 12-13v.

Huijden, den 18^e^ Januarij 1754, compareerde voor mij, Jan Frederick
Tiemmendorf, secretaris van den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses
gouvernements, praesent de naargemelde getuijgen, Amarentia van de Caab,
slavin van den oud opperchirurgijn Dirck Wijdenaar, van competenten
ouderdom, dewelke, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscaal,
Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, verclaarde hoe waar is:

Dat een dag voor Kerstijd, zijnde geweest den 24^e^ December des
voorleeden jaars, de slavin van den burger Jacob van Rheenen de jonge,
Rachel genaamt, ’s morgens heel vroeg aan ’t huijs van der comparante
lijfheer gekoomen weesende, aen haar comparante om wat quik heeft
gevraagt, ten eijnde daarmeede, soo als sij seijde, knoopen te
vergulden; ende de comparante aan deselve ten antwoord gegeeven
hebbende, dat sien soude om haar wat te beschikken, is sij Ragel
weederom weggegaan; koomende egter op Donderdag daaraanvolgende, ’s
morgens vroeg, weederom naar hetselve vragen, ende de comparante alsdoen
teegens haar gesegt hebbende, dat sij soude sien om wat te krijgen en
het aan haar besorgen soude wanneer sij aan haar lijfheers huijs quam om
vleesch te haalen; heeft sij comparante oversulx dien eijgensten morgen
een vlesje van een vingerlang, waarin omtrent een vingerhoed vol quik
was, uijt het, in de galderij staande, kasje van haar lijfheer, waar de
sleutel in stack, genoomen, hetselve bij sig gestooken en vervolgens,
wanneer bij voormelde Van Rheenen vleesch ging haalen, aen den slaaf
Fortuijn, die voor de deur was, overgegeeven ten eijnde hetselve aan
gemelde Ragel, die in ’t huijs was, te overhandigen.

Niets meer verklaarende, geeft de comparante voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, berijd zijnde hetselve, des vereijscht
werdende, nader gestand te doen.

Dat aldus passeerde ter secretarije van justitie des Casteels voormelt,
ten overstaan der clercquen Daniel Egbert Pfeil en Michiel Daniël Leij,
als getuijgen, die de minute deeses, beneevens de comparante ende mij,
secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekend,

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edeleachtbare Raad van Justitie des Casteels de Goede Hoop, voormelde
slavin Amarentia van de Caab, dewelke deese, haare voorenstaande
verclaaring, van woorde tot woorde klaer en duijdelijk voorgeleesen
weesende, verklaarde daarbij ten vollen te persisteeren, niet begeerde
oversulx dat er iets meer bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal, en
betuijgde alle ’t voorenstaende de suijvere waarheijd te weesen.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 26^e^ Januarij 1754, voor
d’ edele R.S. Alleman en H.J. Prehn, leeden uijt den edelagtbare Raad
van Justitie, voormelt, die de minute deeses beneevens de comparante
ende mij, secretaris, behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, Raachel van de Caab, slave of the
burgher Jacobus van Reenen junior, 20 to 21 years old, who on the
requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van
Oudshoorn, confesses it to be true:

That a full month ago now, without knowing the exact day or date, the
confessant’s fellow slave, Joseph, who was found yesterday morning to
have hanged himself, asked her if she knew where mercury was for sale,
with which he said he wanted to clean buttons and mirrors; to which the
confessant answered him that she did not know this, to which the said
Joseph retorted: “Leave it then!”

That some days afterwards, Joseph for the second time inquired after
mercury from the confessant, and also told her to ask a certain *jongen*
named Jacob, who works for the apothecary of the honourable Company’s
hospital, for some mercury or, if he did not have any, to talk to the
slave *meijd*, named Emerentia, of the former second chief surgeon, Dirk
Wijdenaar, about it. The confessant talked to the aforesaid Jacob about
some mercury, without however receiving anything from him, which she
first reported to the said Joseph, which is when he told her anew that
she should request this from Emerentia; which she also did and later, on
the day before last Christmas, she received from this *meijd* a little
bottle with some mercury, which bottle the confessant handed over to the
aforementioned Joseph, which is when the said Joseph requested her to
tell him when her mistress asks for water, which request he also
repeated several times.

That thereafter, on the Friday after New Year, being the 4^th^ of this
month January, when, at about 9 o’clock in the evening, her mistress was
sitting in the moonlight at the door of the house and asked for a glass
of water from the confessant; she, the confessant, therefore informed
the slave Joseph, who was in the back yard, of this, who then, as soon
as the confessant had taken a glass from the cellar, cleaned it in the
kitchen and filled it with water, poured some mercury from the
aforementioned little bottle that she had given him, and added: “Just
give this to the *juffrouw*, who is so false and will then not be able
to look after the household”.

That the confessant handed the water to her said mistress who, while
drinking it, noticed that there was something in the glass, when she
asked the confessant what was in the glass, to which she then answered:
“Nothing at all!” and at the same time wanted to take the said glass
from her mistress, but that the latter, after having inspected it by the
candle, put it aside. On account of this, the confessant went to ask the
aforementioned Joseph what he had done, and when the said Joseph
answered her: “*Nonje* will waste away like a skeleton”, she then became
so afraid that she did not dare to make this known to her mistress.

That this very same evening her master investigated the matter carefully
and asked both her and also the aforementioned Joseph: “What was in the
glass with the water?”, and as the confessant, like the aforesaid
Joseph, did not want to confess anything, her said owner had Joseph
taken to the prison and then, on the following day, had him punished
there, without, however, him confessing even then.

That later, on the following Sunday evening her said owner tied the
hands and feet of the aforementioned Joseph together through the chair
and spanned him into the *poolsche bok*,[^5] and let him sit in this
way for fully an hour long in the expectation that this slave would come
to a confession through it; yet, all in vain, as he only said that the
confessant should know about it; which is why she was tied up in a
similar fashion by her owner and likewise had to sit like this for fully
an hour and a half, without however, out of fear and anxiety, making
known anything at all of the above that night.

That on the following Monday the confessant, after she had been put upon
the *poolsche bok* and had been beaten with a cane on her naked body, at
last frankly confessed to her owner, the aforementioned Van Rheenen, all
of the above which she knew to be true. However, since the
aforementioned Friday, which was the 4^th^ of January of this year, the
said Van Rheenen daily interrogated Joseph about this, yet could not get
anything from him until last Thursday, which is when he expressly told
Van Rheenen that he had poured the mercury into the water; though the
confessant did not hear anything of his intentions or the reasons which
could have moved him to it. And as this confession was done voluntarily
by this *jongen* Joseph on his knees, who also at the same time begged
for forgiveness, the said Van Rheenen answered him that he wanted to
forgive him, but that he would however have to sell him.

The confessant finally declares that she did not know beforehand that
she or Joseph had done anything wicked by it, nor that anything wicked
had been intended, until after having understood from Joseph that her
mistress would waste away because of it, and for this reason she was
afraid to admit anything of this earlier.

Thus confessed at the Cape of Good Hope on 12 January 1754 before the
honourables R.S. Alleman and H.J. Prehn, members of the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed the
original of this, together with the confessant and me, the sworn clerk.

Which I declare, \[signed\] L.F. Haake, sworn clerk.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave Raachel van de Caab,
who, after this, her confession, was read out word by word, clearly and
plainly, declares to fully persist by it, not desiring that anything
more should be added to or taken from it, except only that the slave
Joseph as well as the confessant had been tied by her owner to a chair,
but were not spanning into the *poolsche bok*, declaring further all of
the above to be the whole truth.

Thus verified in the Castle of Good Hope on 17 January 1754 before the
honourables R.S. Alleman and P. Artoijs, members of the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed the
original of this, together with the confessant and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Today, 18 January 1754, there appears before me, Jan Frederick
Tiemmendorf, secretary of the honourable Council of Justice of this
government, in the presence of the witnesses named below, Amarentia van
de Caab, slave of the former chief surgeon, Dirck Wijdenaar, of
competent age, who, on the requisition of the honourable independent
fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, declares it to be true:

That one day before Christmas, being 24 December of last year, the slave
of the burgher Jacob van Rheenen junior, named Raachel, came very early
in the morning to the house of the deponent’s owner and asked her for
some mercury in order to, as she said, gild buttons with; and that the
deponent answered her that she would see if she could procure her some,
after which Raachel went away again. However, early in the morning of
the following Thursday she again came to ask for the same, and that the
deponent then told her that she would see if she could get some and
would deliver it to her when she came to her owner’s house to collect
meat. On that very same morning she, the deponent, took a little bottle
of about a finger long, in which was about half a thimble’s mercury,
from the little cabinet of her owner standing in the *galderij* and in
which the key was left, and hid the same on her and later, when she went
to collect meat from Van Reenen, she handed it over to the slave
Fortuijn, who was in front of the door, to deliver the same to the said
Raachel, who was inside the house.

There being nothing more to declare, the deponent asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of her statement as in the text, being willing
to subsequently confirm the same, if so required.

Thus recorded in the office of the secretary of justice of the Castle,
aforementioned, in the presence of the clerks, Daniel Egbert Pfeil and
Michiel Daniël Leij, as witnesses, who have properly signed the original
of this, together with the deponent and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, the aforementioned slave
Amarentia van de Caab, who, after this, her above statement, was read
out word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist by it,
therefore not desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it,
and declares all of the above to be the whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 26 January 1754 before the
honourables R.S. Alleman and H.J. Prehn, members of the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed the
original of this, together with the deponent and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

[^1]: * See Thomson (2003) on this case. *

[^2]: * Rachel steadfastly denied that she had known she was doing
    anything wrong, and the sentence recommended in the *eijsch* and
    given by the court was more lenient than the death sentence usually
    given to slaves who attempted to harm their owners, but nonetheless
    included being exposed on the gallows with a rope around her neck,
    after which she was flogged, branded and riveted in chains for the
    rest of her life, CJ 363, f. 5 and CJ 36, ff. 2-3. In addition to
    the testimonies of Rachel and Amarentia van de Caab, included here,
    that of Jacobus van Reenen is given in CJ 363, ff. 10-16. A
    s*ententie* is also available in CJ 788, ff. 157-62.*

[^3]: * Van Reenen claimed that the danger to his wife had ‘hem
    genoegsaam raasende hadde gemaakt’ (made him almost raving with
    fury). The court was unsympathetic and Van Reenen was found guilty
    of punishing and tormenting Rachel van de Caab and Joseph van
    Bengalen without permission; while the court also ordered Rachel to
    be sold (for Van Reenen’s profit) and never to come into his or his
    family’s possession, CJ 36, ff. 6-8 and CJ 363, ff. 21-4. *

[^4]:  The word *basta* was commonly used, especially but not
    exclusively, by slaves at the Cape in their Dutch, presumably
    because of the prevalence of Creole Portuguese as a lingua franca in
    their speech community. It usually means ‘stop it’, but here seems
    to be used in the sense of ‘leave it, let it be’. On the use of this
    word amongst slaves in the eighteenth century, see Franken 1953:
    112-13.

[^5]:  For the meaning of this, see 1749 Reijnier van Madagasacar, n. 4.
