1.  JANUARIJ VAN BOEGIES

*Here a Cape Town slave attacked his partner (also a slave), with whom
he had had several children, because he saw another slave in the house
rocking the cradle of their child and became jealous. He ran away but,
without proper clothing and food, was forced to give himself
up.*^*[^1]*^* *

*Apart from the nature of the relationships and jealousies between
slaves in an urban household, the case contains a number of details of
interest. Owners and burghers were entirely absent from the account of
the events*^*[^2]*^* and there is some rare insight into the emotional
feelings of a slave.*^*[^3]*^* The household also had a specialised
slave cook (Schindelaar was a lieutenant-captain and clearly upheld a
relatively prosperous lifestyle).*^*[^4]*^* The weapon used in the
attack was a *parrang*, a Southeast Asian term for a short machete.
Januarij could not exist on his own on the mountain without prior
preparation, and was able to regain access to the house via a Chinese
resident who lived in the outbuildings. *

**CJ 365 **Criminele Process Stukken, Deel 2, 1755, ff. 730-31v.

Relaas gegeeven, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscaal Pieter
Reede van Oudshoorn, door Clara van Maccasser, slavinne van wijlen den
capitain lieutenant militair, Godfried Gerhard Schindelaar, luijdende
als volgt:

Dat den relatante heeden in de naardemiddag, de klocke nae gissing twee
ofte half drie uuren, beesig zijnde omme het klijnste soontje van wijlen
haaren lijfheer aan te kleeden, sij alsdoen, vermits haar relatante
kleijnste kind, ’twelk in de agtercaamer in eene wiege \[*sic*\] lag,
sterk schreuwde, den kok van haar geweesene lijfheer, in naame Augustus,
versogt heeft om hetselve wat te wiegen, hetwelke door denselven gedaan
wordende, is intusschen haar relatantes meede slaaf, genaamt Januarij,
bij denwelken sij relatante is houdende, te huijs gekomen, denwelken,
siende dat gedagte Augustus haar relatantes kind wiegde, vroeg wat dat
voormelde Augustus bij de wieg te doen had, op ’twelke bij haar
geantwoord weesende dat hij haar kind, dewijl hetselve huijlde, was
wiegende, met bijvoeging dat niet wiste daar iets quaads in te steeken;
is gedagte Januarij, al pruttende en knorrende, naar agter in de
combuijs gegaan, onder het seggen: Gij hebt eene ziel, en ik heb eene
ziel; dog dewijl dien slaaf, kort daarop de combuijs weeder uijtquam, en
naar de voordeur ging, deselve toesloot, en de sleutel uijt die deur
haalde, wierd sij relatante bevreest; weshalven sij opstonds, haar kind
op de arm, en ’t kind van wijlen haar lijfvrouw aen de hand nam, en daar
meede in de agterkaamer vlugte, teffens de deur agter haar toemaakende;
dan dewijl sij geen sleutel in de deur vond, konde sij relatante deselve
niet sluijten, alwaaromme de relatante opstonds uijt het venster op
straat sprong; maar inmiddels dat sij doende was om gemelde kind van
haare lijfvrouwe insgelijx buijten het venster bij haar op straat te
willen tillen, door voormelde Januarij besprongen zijnde, kapte
denselven met een in de hand hebbende parrang van binnen uijt de kaamer
na haar, invoegen sij opstonds een kap vlak oover haar hoofd ontfing,
dewelke egter op de, in ’t hair hebbende, silvere haairpen, grootendeels
is gestuijt, waarna denselven nog een kap op haar regterschouder deed,
sonder egter verder als door de kleederen geraakt te hebben, weshalven
sij relatante de verdere kappen met haar regter hand willende afweeren,
alsdoen nog drie kappen en quetsuuren in deselve gekreegen heeft;
middelerwijl dat voormelde klijne kind haarer lijfvrouwe uijt de kaamer
weggeloopen, en vervolgens voormelde Januarij insgelijx door het venster
gesprongen en ’t met der vlugt ontkomen is, de parrang en sleutel der
voordeur meede genoomen hebbende.

Aldus gerelateerd aen Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 2^e^ November 1755, ten
bijweese der clercquen Otto Wilhelm Rotenburg en Jochem Hendrick
Borgwedel, als getuijgen, die de minute deeses, beneevens de relatante
ende mij, eerste geswore clercq, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, C.L. Neethling, eerste geswore clercq, als hiertoe,
vermits de absentie van den secretaris van justitie, gevaceerd hebbende.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, des Casteels de Goede Hoop, voormeld,
Clara van Maccasser, dewelken dit, haar gegeeven relaas, van woorde tot
woorde klaar en duijdelijk voorgeleesen weesende, verclaarde daarbij ten
vollen te persisteeren, oversulx niet begeerende dat er iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden zal, en betuijgde in ’t bijweesen van
den slaaf Januarij van Boegies alle ’t voorenstaande de suijvere
waarheijd te weesen.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 13^e^ November 1755, voor
d’ edele Cl. Brand en Js. Hs. Blankenberg, leeden uijt welgemelde
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, die de minute deeses, beneevens den
confessant^[^5]^ ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben
onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

**CJ 365 **Criminele Process Stukken, Deel 2, 1755, ff. 727-29.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie des Casteels de Goede Hoop, Januarij van
Boegies, lijfeijgen der erfgenaamen van wijlen den capitain lieutenant
militair, Godfried Gerhard Schindelaar, oud naar gissing 45 jaaren,
denwelken, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscaal Pieter Reede
van Oudshoorn, confesseerde hoe waar is:

Dat hij confessant op Sondag, zijnde geweest den 2^e^ deeser maand
November, des agtermiddags te huijs gekomen zijnde, sijn meede slavin
Clara van Maccassar, bij dewelke den confessant het is houdende, en
waarbij hij verscheijde kinderen heeft, neevens den kok, Augustus
genaamt, tesaamen alleen in de galderij heeft gevonden, welken
laatstgemelde op het gesigt van den confessant in de agterkamer bij een
aldaar staande wieg liep, en des confessants kind, dat in deselve lag,
wiegde; weshalven hij confessant door minneneijd aangedreeven, aan
gemelde Clara vroeg, wat of die jongen, op den welken hij al een
geruijmen tijd herwaards eenige jalousie had opgevat, bij haar te doen
hadde, dewelke hierop geantwoord hebbende: Niemendal, quam voormelde
Augustus, die sulx hoorde, de agterkamer uijt, den confessant alsdoen
verbiedende om teegens die meijd te spreeken, waarop hij confessant, bij
sigselfs moeijelijk werdende, naar de agterplaats is gegaan, van meening
weesende van daar een stuck brandhout te haalen om geciteerde meijd
Clara daarmeede te slaan, dog, door quaatheijd buijten sijn kennis en
verstand raakende, heeft hij confessant in plaats van een stuck
brandhoud in ’t slaavenhuijs een parrang in de hand gekreegen, waarmeede
hij naar vooren is gekomen en, naar de voordeur toegeslooten en den
sleutel daaruijt getrokken te hebben, is den confessant naar de
agterkamer, waarin voormelde Clara, mitsgaders voorseijde Augustus en
het kleijnste kind van wijlen sijn juffrouw, sig waaren bevindende,
gegaan; als wanneer hij confessant eevengemelde Clara, die neevens
voorseijde Augustus reets uijt ’t venster buijtenshuijs was gevlugt,
naargesprongen, en deselve alsdoen met voormelde parrang een cap of drie
heeft gegeeven, sonder te kunnen seggen waar of deselve geraakt heeft,
ende hij confessant hierop die meijd siende bloeden, heeft hij zig soo
voort met voormelde parrang op de vlugt naar ’t Tafelgebergte begeeven,
vanwaar de tweede nagt met behulp van de goot van ’t agterste plathuijs,
waarin een Chinees woont, eerst op dat plat, en vervolgens op de agter
plaats van sijn lijfvrouw is geklommen, ten eijnde zijn waakrok, vermits
niets anders als een hembdrok aanhadde, magtig te worden, dog, sulks
niet willende lukken, is den confessant weeder naar het gebergte
gemarcheert, alwaar sig tot eergisteren opgehouden hebbende, is
denselven, door honger geperst, des avonds naar de thuijn van de weeduwe
wijlen den oud burgerraad, sieur Jan de Wit gegaan, alwaar, naar de
parrang in de combuijs van sig geworpen te hebben, sig aan den knegt
gevangen heeft overgegeeven, denwelken hem vervolgens naar de tronk
gebragt heeft.

Betuijgende den confessant laatstelijk nog niet van meening geweest te
sijn om geciteerde meijd Clara, nogte den slaaf Augustus, te vermoorden,
maar eenelijk de meijd Clara te slaan, mitsgaders dat hij confessant
niet weet waar de sleutel van de voordeur, die hij uijt deselve heeft
getrokken ten tijde dat buijten sig selfs is geweest en niet heeft
geweeten wat of gedaan heeft, is beland, vermits hij die sleutel uijt
zijn sak heeft verlooren.

Aldus geconfesseert bij vertolking uijt het Portugees, in ’t Casteel de
Goede Hoop, den 12^e^ November 1755, voor d’ edele Cl. Brand en Js. Hs.
Blanckenberg, leeden uijt den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, voormeld,
die de minute deeses, beneevens den confessant ende mij, secretaris,
meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edeleagtbaare Raad van Justitie des Casteels de Goede Hoop, voormeld,
Januarij van Boegies, denwelken deese, sijne gegeevene confessie, van
woorde tot woorde klaar en duijdelijk voorgeleesen zijnde, betuijgde
daarbij ten vollen te persisteeren, niet begeerende oversulx dat er iets
meer bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden zal.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 13^e^ November 1755, voor
d’ edele Cl. Brand en Js. Hs. Blankenberg, leeden uijt den edeleagtbaare
Raad van Justitie, voormeld, die de minute deeses, beneevens den
confessant ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable independent
fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, by Clara van Macassar, slave of the
late captain lieutenant of the military, Godfried Gerhard Schindelaar,
going as follows:

That today in the afternoon, the time two or half past two o’clock at a
guess, when the testifier was busy dressing the youngest son of her late
owner, she, because her youngest child,^[^6]^ who was lying in the back
room in a cradle, was crying loudly, at that time requested the cook of
her former owner, by the name of Augustus, to rock the same. In the
meantime, while he was doing this, her fellow slave, named Januarij,
with whom she has a relationship, came home; who, when seeing that the
said Augustus was rocking her child, asked what the aforementioned
Augustus was doing at the cradle, to which she answered that he was
rocking her child since it had been crying, adding that she did not know
that there was anything wrong with that. The said Januarij then went
mumbling and grumbling to the kitchen at the back, saying: “You have a
soul, and I have a soul”. However, since, shortly thereafter, this slave
came back from the kitchen and went to the front door, locked the same
and took the key from the door, the testifier became frightened; for
which reason she immediately, with her child on the arm, took the child
of her late owner by its hand, and fled with them into the back room,
besides closing the door after her. But, as she could not find the key
in the door, the testifier could not lock it, because of which she at
once jumped through the window into the street, but while she was busy
lifting the said child of her owner through the window to her in the
street, she was leaped upon by the aforementioned Januarij who, from
inside the room, hit her on the outside with a *parrang* which he held
in his hand, so that she instantly received a blow straight on her head,
which, however, was largely thwarted by a silver hair pin in her hair,
after which he dealt her another blow on the right shoulder, but without
being hit deeper than through the clothes; however, as she wanted to
prevent further blows with her right hand, she then also received three
cuts and wounds on it. In the meantime, the aforementioned little child
of her owner had run from the room, while Januarij also jumped through
the window and got away by fleeing, taking with him the *parrang* and
the key of the front door.

Thus related at the Cape of Good Hope on 2 November 1755 in the presence
of the clerks Otto Wilhelm Rotenburg and Jochem Hendrick Borgwedel, as
witnesses, who have properly signed the original of this, together with
the testifier and me, the honourable sworn clerk.

Which I declare, C.L. Neethling, the honourable sworn clerk who, because
of the absence of the secretary of justice, held this sitting.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the
aforementioned honourable Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope,
Clara van Macassar, who, after this, her given statement, was read out
word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to fully persist with it,
therefore not desiring that anything more should be added or taken from
it; and declares in the presence of the slave Januarij van Boegies all
of the above to be the whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 13 November 1755 before the
honourables Cl. Brand and Js. Hs. Blankenberg, members of the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed the
original of this, together with the confessant^[^7]^ and me, the
secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, Januarij van Boegies,
bondsman of the heirs of the late captain lieutenant of the military,
Godfried Gerhard Schindelaar, 45 years old at a guess, who, on the
requisition of the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van
Oudshoorn, confesses it to be true:

That coming home during the afternoon on Sunday, which was the 2^nd^ of
this month November, the confessant found his fellow slave, Clara van
Macassar, with whom he has a relationship and with whom he has several
children, together with the cook, named Augustus, on their own in the
*galderij*, of which the last named, upon sighting the confessant,
walked into the back room to a cradle standing there and rocked the
confessant’s child who was lying in it. Wherefore the confessant, driven
by the jealousy of love, asked the said Clara, what this *jongen*,
against whom he for a considerable time had conceived a certain
jealousy, had to do with her, who answered to this: “Nothing at all”.
The aforementioned Augustus, when hearing this, came from the back room
and then fobade the confessant to speak to this *meijd*, whereupon the
confessant, feeling provoked, went to the back yard with the intention
to get there a piece of firewood with which to beat the said *meijd*
Clara, yet, becoming senseless and mindless because of anger, he got
into his hand in the slave house a *parrang*, instead of a piece of
firewood, with which the confessant proceeded to the front and, after
locking the front door and pulling the key from it, went to the back
room in which was the aforementioned Clara, as also the aforesaid
Augustus and the youngest child of his late *juffrouw*, which is when
the confessant jumped after the said Clara who, together with the
aforesaid Augustus, had already fled through the window to the outside
of the house, and then, with the aforementioned *parrang*, gave her a
cut or three, without being able to say where or whether he had hit her.
And upon seeing this *meijd* bleeding, the confessant fled with the
*parrang* to Table Mountain.^[^8]^ From here, on the second night, he,
with the help of the drainpipe of the back flat-roofed house,^[^9]^ in
which a Chinese lives, first climbed onto that flat roof and then into
the back yard of his owner’s, in order to obtain his oilskin coat, since
he was wearing nothing but a shirt. Yet, as this was not successful, the
confessant again progressed to the mountain, where he remained till the
day before yesterday when, forced by hunger, he went during the evening
to the garden of the widow of the late former burgher councillor,
*sieur* Jan de Wit, where he, after having thrown the *parrang* into the
kitchen, gave himself up as prisoner to the *knecht*, who then brought
him to the prison.

The confessant declares finally that he had not been of the intention to
murder either the said *meijd* Clara, nor the slave Augustus, but only
to beat the *meijd* Clara; as also that he does not know what happened
to the key of the front door, which he had taken from it when he was
besides himself and did not know what he was doing, since he had lost
the key from his pocket.

Thus confessed, through interpretation from Portuguese, in the Castle of
Good Hope on 12 November 1755, before the honourables Cl. Brand and Js.
Hs. Blanckenberg, members of the aforementioned honourable Council of
Justice, who have properly signed the original of this, together with
the confessant and me, the secretary.

Verification

  
There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of the Castle of Good Hope, aforementioned, Januarij
van Boegies, who, after this, his given confession, had been read out
word by word, clearly and plainly, declares to persist fully with it,
therefore not desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 13 November 1755 before the
honourables Cl. Brand and Js. Hs. Blankenberg, members of the
aforementioned honourable Council of Justice, who have properly signed
the original of this, together with the confessant and me, the
secretary.^[^10]^

Which I declare, \[signed\] Jn. Fr. Tiemmendorf, secretary.

[^1]: * These two statements are the only ones that were taken. There is
    unfortunately no statement from Augustus. A *sententie* is available
    in CJ 788, ff. 220-24.*

[^2]: * The slaves appear to have been left alone in the house. Both
    their owner and his wife had recently died, so they may have been
    looking after the house and child while Schindelaar’s estate was
    being finalised. It is likely that their owners were victims of the
    1755 smallpox epidemic which ravaged Cape Town (see Viljoen 1995:
    28-35).*

[^3]: * Notably in Januarij’s words to Clara: ‘Jij hebt een ziel en ik
    heb een ziel’ (you have a soul and I have a soul).*

[^4]: * Schindelaar arrived at the Cape in 1731 as a soldier, but worked
    himself up through the ranks until he became lieutenant-captain in
    1750. He then married Johanna Delitzsch, who was the widow of the
    previous incumbent of that post (Hoge 1946: 361-2). An inventory of
    his large and prosperous house on the Heerengracht was taken in
    August 1755 when Johanna Delitzsch died (MOOC 8/8, document 34½). *

[^5]:  *Sic*. Clara van Macassar is not a *confessant*, but a *relatant*
    in this document.

[^6]:  This was probably Roosje van de Caab, who was listed in the
    inventory of 1755 (MOOC 8/8, document 34½ ). She was born after a
    previous inventory dating from 1752 (MOOC 8/8, document 34).

[^7]:  *Sic*. Clara van Macassar is not the confessant in this case, but
    a testifier.

[^8]:  For Table Mountain as a popular hideaway for slave runaways, see
    1735 Company slaves, n. 1.

[^9]:  Literally ‘flat house’. The 1755 inventory describes these as
    ‘drie aparte huur huijsjes’ (three small separate houses for rent),
    MOOC 8/8, document 34½ . They were clearly hired out, one to a
    Chinese tenant. This detail provides rare evidence of the mixed
    nature of property in one of the most properous streets in the town,
    with a wealthy household on the outside of the block and poorer
    rented buildings at the rear. We are grateful to Antonia Malan for
    this information.

[^10]:  Januarij van Boegies was found guilty on 4 December of ‘opset
    gepleegde moordadige quetsing’ (deliberately committed murderous
    wounding). Clara was examined by surgeons who declared that the
    wounds inflicted by Januarij on her head were potentially fatal, CJ
    365, f. 732. Januarij admitted guilt and asked forgiveness, CJ 37,
    ff. 106-7. The death sentence by hanging was more lenient than that
    recommended in the *eijsch* of breaking on the cross with the *coup
    de grâce*, CJ 365, ff. 725v-26.
