1.  TITUS VAN MOCHA

*This episode shows that runaway slaves could not always rely upon other
slaves to help them.*^*[^1]*^* Titus escaped from his rural owner in
Roodezand*^*[^2]*^* to Cape Town, but was given up to the authorities by
some of the Company slaves to whom he appealed for help. The case is
also interesting for the details that it provides of the housing of
slaves at the Company brickworks. They stayed in a hut near the furnace,
not in the Slave Lodge in town, perhaps because they needed to tend the
furnace during the night.*^*[^3]*^* *

**CJ 789** Sententiën, 1756-1760, ff. 121-25.

Dewijl uijt de vrijwillige gerecolleerde confessie van Titus van Mocha,
lijfeijgen van den landbouwer Jacobus du Toij \[*sic*\], oud naar
gissing 27 jaaren, thans ’s heeren gevangen, en andere stucken ten
processe gefourneert, het den edelachtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses
gouvernements middagklaer is komen te blijken:

Dat den gevangen ter saake hij, volgens sijn voorgeeven, van geen
genoegsaame kost nog kleederen voorsien, en bovensdien dagelijks
geslagen wierd, nu omtrend neegen weeken voorleeden, van de plaats van
voorseijde sijn lijfheer, geleegen aan ’t Roodesand, is gaan opdrossen
en, naar hier en daar rondgesworven te hebben, sig vervolgens
Caabwaarts, mitsgaders naar de voet van de Tafelberg vervoegt heeft,
alwaar den gevangen, soo als hij segt, hem eenigen tijd in de thuijn van
den burger Michiel Breda schuijlgehouden en met de, van ’t Roodesand
meede gebragte, quepeeren g’erneert hebbende, eijndelijk op Saturdag,
den 29^e\ ^der gepasseerde maand April, door honger geperst, in de nagt
is gegaan naar de daar omtrent leggende craal van den commissaris van
civile en huwelijkssaaken, Arend de Waal, uijt dewelke den gevangen een
hamel gestolen, mitsgaders denselven de kop afgesneeden, en hem
daarmeede vervoegt heeft naar ’s Compagnies steenbakkereij, met
voorneemen om met hulp der in ’t daarbij staande huijs bescheijdene
slaven der edele Compagnie voorseijde hamel verder af te slagten; welke
voorseijde slaven egter den gevangen, soo dra hij aan ’t voormelde huijs
had geklopt, en ’tselve door henlieden geopent was, op het sien van
voorseijde hamel, als een drosser gevangen genoomen, mitsgaders ’s
volgenden daags in handen van justitie overgeleevert hebben.

Ende nademaal soodanige diefstal in eene welgestelde regeering niet kan
nog mag gedult, maar daarenteegens, ten exempel en afschrick van andere
diergelijke fielten, rigoureuselijk moet gestraft werden.

Soo is ’t, dat den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements,
te dage dienende, aandagtelijk hebbende geleesen ende geresumeert den
schriftelijken crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie door den heer
Independent Fiscaal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, *nomine officii*, op
ende jeegens den gevangen gedaan ende genoomen, weijders geleth op des
gevangens vrijwillige gerecolleerde confessie, en op alle ’tgeene voorts
ter saake dienende was en haar edelagtbaarens konde doen moveeren,
doende regt uijt naame ende van weegens de hoogmoogende heeren Staaten
Generaal der Vereenigde Neederlanden, mitsgaders van sijne doorlugtigste
hoogheijd den heere Prince van Oranjen en Nassouw, als Erfstadhouder,
Capitain en Admiraal Generaal van de Republicq, condemneert den gevangen
Titus van Mocha: omme gebragt te werden ter plaatse, alwaar men alhier
gewoon is crimineele sententiën te executeeren, aldaar den scherpregter
overgeleevert en aan een paal gebonden sijnde, met roeden op de bloote
rugge strengelijk gegeesselt en daarop gebrandmerkt te werden, voorts
voor den tijd van vijf agtereenvolgende jaaren in de ketting geklonken
sijnde, sijn lijfheer te huijs gesonden te werden, mits betaalende de
kosten en misen van justitie; ontseggende den Raad den anders gedaanen
eijsch van den heer Officier.

Aldus gedaan ende gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 8^e^
Junij 1758, mitsgaders gepronuntieert ende g’executeert den
10^e\ ^daaraanvolgende.

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] R. Tulbagh.

\[get.\] S. Swellengrebel, R.S. Allemann, Cl. Brand, D. d’Aillij, Jn.
Fr. Tiemmendorf, Pieter Coningh, P. Hacker, Dl. Heijning, Jn. Haszingh,
Hk. vn. dr. Heijde, J.M. Cruijwagen.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

**CJ 370** Criminele Process Stukken, 1758, ff. 172-74v.

Relaas gegeeven, ter requisitie van den heer Independent Fiscaal, Pieter
Reede van Oudshoorn, door ’s edel Compagnies lijfeijgen, Coetoe van
Madagascar, van competenten ouderdom, luijdende als volgt:

Dat nu een dag of twaalf voorleeden, ofte in den nagt tusschen seekeren
Saturdag en Sondag, wanneer den relatant, die beneevens meerdere ’s edel
Compagnies lijfeijgenen bij de steenovens bescheijden is, sig met
deselve in het daarbij staande huijsje te slapen bevond hij, de klocke
over twaalf uuren, soo door het geklop, hetwelk voor aan de deur
geschied, als het aanslaan der honden, wacker geworden sijnde, hij
relatant alsdoen opgestaan en sig buijten dat huijs en naar de groote
deur begeeven, en deselve opengemaakt heeft, ten eijnde te sien wie hem
aldaar quam te bevinden.

Dat den relatant alsdoen in den donkeren, niet ver van het huijs, iemand
gewaar geworden sijnde, die door de honden omcingeld \[*sic*\] was, en
een tree of drie van hem af iets op de grond leggende, hetwelk den
relatant in ’t eerst vermeijnde nog een persoon te sijn, dog voorts
ontdekte dat het een schaap was; hij oversulx, naar alvoorens sijn
makker, in naame Claas, ter sijner assistentie geroepen te hebben, den
door den honden omcingelden persoon toegeroepen en gevraagt heeft wie
hij was en wat hij daar quam doen; op ’twelk denselven, dien hij
relatant teffens gewaar wierd een slavejongen te sijn, hem relatant ten
antwoord gaf dat hij van agter de cloof en van den burger Evert Colijn
quam, die hem gehuurd had, teffens versoekende dat hij relatant hem het
bij sig hebbende schaap wilde helpen afslagten.

Dat hij relatant, als het voorgeeven van dien slaaf niet gelooven
kunnende, denselven oversulx opstonds vastgebonden en, beneevens het
voormelde schaap, waarvan hij relatant gewaar wierd, dat de kop reets
afgesneeden was, in ’t voorseijde huijs gebragt, denselven onder opsigt
eeniger sijner meede slaven gelaaten, en op staande voet daarvan aan
den, niet ver daarvandaan woonende ’s edel Compagnies pottebacker,
kennis gegeeven heeft, hebbende bovengemelde gevangen genoomen slaaf
vervolgens bekend, een drosser te weesen, mitsgaders dat hij het schaap
uijt de craal van den commissaris van civile zaaken, Arend de Waal
gehaald, en de kop daarvan in die kraal reets afgesneeden had, al
waaromme den relatant met behulp eeniger sijner meede slaaven
meergemelde jongen, beneevens het gedoode schaap, ’s volgenden morgens
Caabwaarts gebragt en aan ’s heeren geweldiger overgeleevert heeft.

Anders niet relateerende, geeft den relatant voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, met praesentie van dit, sijn gerelateerde,
ten allen tijden nader gestand te sullen doen.

Aldus gerelateerd ter secretarije van justitie des Casteels de Goede
Hoop, den 11^e^ Maij 1758, in ’t bijweesen der clerquen Jochem Hendrik
Borgwedel en Carel Frederik Brink, als getuijgen, die de minute deeses,
beneevens den relatant ende mij, secretaris, meede behoorlijk hebben
onderteekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens, uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, voormeld, Coetoe
van Madagascar, denwelken dit, sijn gegeeven relaas, van woorde tot
woorde klaar ende duijdeliljk voorgeleesen weesende, verklaarde daarbij
ten vollen te persisteeren niet begeerende oversulx dat er iets meer
bijgevoegt ofte van gedaan werden sal, en betuijgde in praesentie van
den slaaf Titus van Mocha al het voorenstaande de suijvere waarheijd te
sijn.

Aldus gerecolleert aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 12^e^ Maij 1758, voor d’
edele Pieter Coningh en Jn. Haszingh, leeden uijt den edelagtbaare Raad
van Justitie, voormeld, die de minute deeses, beneevens den relatant
ende mij, geswoore clercq, meede behoorlijk hebben gesubscribeert.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] L.S. Faber, geswore clercq.

TRANSLATION

Since from the voluntary, verified confession of Titus van Mocha^[^4]^,
bondsman of the farmer Jacobus du Toij \[*sic*\], 27 years old at a
guess, currently their honours’ prisoner, and from the other evidence
furnished in the case, it has come to appear as clear as daylight to the
honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That about nine weeks ago now, because, according to his own assertion,
the prisoner was not provided with sufficient food nor clothes, and
moreover got beaten every day, he ran away from his aforesaid owner’s
farm, situated at Roodesand and, after roaming here and there, resorted
to the Cape, and to the foot of Table Mountain, where the prisoner, so
he says, hid himself for some time in the garden of the burgher Michiel
Breda and sustained himself with the quinces he had brought with him
from Roodesand; but finally, forced by hunger, he went at night to the
nearby corral of the commissioner of civil and marriage affairs, Arend
de Waal, from where the prisoner stole a wether and, moreover, cut off
its head, and resorted with it to the Company’s brick furnace with the
intention to complete the slaughtering of the aforesaid wether with the
help of the slaves of the noble Company assigned to the house beside the
furnace; which slaves, however, as soon as he had knocked at the
aforementioned house, and it was opened by them, and upon seeing the
aforesaid wether, took him prisoner as a deserter, as well as delivering
him the following day into the hands of justice.

And since such thievery cannot be, nor should be, tolerated in a
well-appointed government, but should, on the contrary, be rigorously
punished as an example and deterrent to other similarly inclined
scoundrels.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice of this government,
serving today, having seen and read with attention the written
*crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie*, drawn up and delivered for and
against the prisoner by the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede
van Oudshoorn, in his official capacity, besides having noted the
prisoner’s voluntary, verified confession, and further everything else
which served the case and could have moved their honours, practising
justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States
General of the United Netherlands, as well as his most serene highness
the Lord Prince of Orange and Nassau, as hereditary Stadholder, Captain
and Admiral General of the Republic, sentences the prisoner Titus van
Mocha: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually
executed here, there to be handed over to the executioner and to be tied
to a stake, to be severely scourged with rods on his bare back, and
thereupon to be branded, further to be riveted in chains for a period of
five consecutive years, to be sent home to his owner, provided he pays
the costs and expenditure of justice; with the Council denying the
otherwise drawn up *eijsch* of the honourable officer.^[^5]^

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 8 June 1758, as
well as pronounced and executed on the 10^th^ thereupon.

Let the execution be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

\[signed\] S. Swellengrebel, R.S. Allemann, Cl. Brand, D. d’Aillij, Jn.
Fr. Tiemmendorf, Pieter Coningh, P. Hacker, Dl. Heijning, Jn. Haszingh,
Hk. vn. dr. Heijde, J.M. Cruijwagen.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable independent
fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, by the bondsman of the honourable
Company, Coetoe van Madagascar, of competent age, going as follows:  
  
That about twelve days ago now, or in the night between a certain
Saturday and Sunday, when the testifier, who is stationed with other
bondsmen of the honourable Company at the brick ovens and was sleeping
with them in a little hut standing there, woke up after twelve o’clock
both through the knocking which was done on the door in front and
through the barking of the dogs, got up, went outside of this hut and on
to the large door and opened it in order to see who could be
there.^[^6]^

That the testifier then became aware of somebody in the dark not far
from the hut who was surrounded by the dogs and that, about three paces
from him, something was lying on the ground, which the testifier at
first supposed to have been another person, but later discovered that it
was a sheep; and therefore, after first calling his comrade by the name
of Claas to assist him, he called to the person surrounded by the dogs
and asked him who he was and what he came to do there. Upon which he,
whom the testifier then noticed to be a slave *jongen*, answered the
testifier that he came from beyond the kloof, from the burgher Evert
Colijn, who had hired him, at the same time requesting that the
testifier help him to slaughter the sheep that he had with him.

As the testifier could not believe what this slave was claiming, he
therefore tied him up immediately and took him, with the aforesaid
sheep, of which the testifier noticed that its head had already been cut
off, into the aforementioned hut and left him under the supervision of
some of his fellow slaves and forthwith went from there to inform the
honourable Company’s potter, who lived not far from there. The
abovementioned captive slave then confessed to be a runaway, as also
that he had taken the sheep from the corral of the commissioner of civil
cases, Arend de Waal, and that he had already cut off its head in that
corral. On account of which the testifier, with the help of some of his
fellow slaves, took the aforementioned *jongen*, with the dead sheep, to
the Cape the following morning and handed them over to their honours’
*geweldiger*.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the certainty of his statement as in the text, while
offering to subsequently confirm this, his statement, at all times.

Thus related in the office of the Secretary of Justice at the Castle of
Good Hope on 11 May 1758, in the presence of the clerks Jochem Hendrik
Borgwedel and Carel Frederik Brink as witnesses, who have properly
signed the original of this, together with the testifier and me, the
secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the aforementioned Coetoe van
Madagascar who, after the statement he had given was read out word by
word, plainly and clearly, declares to fully persist by it, therefore
not desiring that anything more be added to or taken from it, and
testifies, in the presence of the slave Titus van Mocha, all of the
aforegoing to be the whole truth.

Thus verified at the Cape of Good Hope on 12 May 1758 before the
honourables Pieter Coningh and Jn. Haszingh, members of the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly undersigned the
original of this, together with the testifier and me, the sworn clerk.

Which I declare, \[signed\] L.S. Faber, sworn clerk.

[^1]: * For other cases in which slaves support the law rather than
    other slaves, see 1709 Samel and 1726 Scipio van de Cust. *

[^2]: * Assuming that Roodezand here refers to the pass leading to the
    Land van Waveren, the distance between it and the Castle in Cape
    Town was 24 Amsterdam miles or 178 kilometres (Valentijn 1971, vol.
    I: 204). According to Böeseken and Cairns (1989: 19) it took 18-20
    hours to cover this route on horseback, and so would have involved
    several days of walking for Titus. *

[^3]: * The documentation for this case includes the *eijsch*, and
    testimonies by Titus and two of the Company slaves, Coetoe and
    Claas, CJ 370, ff. 167-76. Titus’s testimony states that he went to
    the Company brickworks at 6 a.m. on a Sunday morning, although
    Coetoe and Claas claim it was during the night. Titus also adds one
    interesting detail: he went to Cape Town after his escape in order
    to see his child, who was a slave of the burgher Burgert Reijner (CJ
    370, f. 170). This is a glimpse of the network of slave kin which
    existed across the colony. For another example of a slave escaping
    to visit kin living at a distance, see 1705 Cinna. *

[^4]:  Only a very few slaves at the Cape came from Mocha, a major
    trading port and coffee-producing centre in Yemen, at the southern
    point of the Arabian Peninsula. The VOC regularly traded in the area
    and established a temporary trading post there in the seventeenth
    century, which they abandoned in 1739 in the face of English
    competition (Jacobs 2000: 197-202). Titus would only have been a
    young child when the VOC left the area, but it is not known from
    where he originated or how he became enslaved.

[^5]:  The *eijsch *recommended the death sentence (CJ 370, ff.
    168v-69), but the court decided that this was too severe a penalty
    since Titus had not killed anybody, CJ 40, ff. 48-50. Surprisingly,
    Titus was charged only with sheep stealing, and not with desertion.

[^6]:  According to Mentzel (1921: 65) there were ‘large field-ovens …,
    containing six orifices, each four feet apart, and forming a long
    vaulted passage’. These were situated outside the town, at the far
    end of the Company’s Gardens, which then extended much further than
    they do today (no. 23 on the map in Mentzel 1921: 86-7).
