# SLAMMAT VAN BOUGIS

*This is a rare example of a slave who answers back when told to get on
with his work.[^1] When his owner tried to hit him with a spade,
Slammat attacked him. Slammat now had nothing to lose, and set fire to
his owner’s house and workplace before fleeing with a gun. Arson was a
relatively common means by which slaves got their own back on their
owners by destroying their property.[^2] Slammat was not captured
and so we have no record of what happened to him.*[^3]

**1/STB 3/11** Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeven, ter requisitie van den heer landdrost, Adriaan van
Schoor, door den burger Andries Nolte, van competenten ouderdom,
inhoudende als volgt:

Dat den relatant, die woonagtig is op desselfs plaats aan het Roode Sand
gelegen, voorleeden Saturdag, den 8^e^ deeser, des voordemiddags de
schapentroup van den landbouwer Jan Jourdaen d’oude naer de plaats van
den relatant zullende gebragt worden, om voor hem relatant een hamel tot
zijn gebruijk daar uijt te neemen, den relatant, op het zien aankomen
van gemelde troup schapen, den bij hem woonende jongeling Christiaen
Smal heeft gelast dies wagter met ’t aandrijven te hulp te gaan. Dat den
relatant zig hierop naer den thuin, werwaerts hij desselfs slaef Slammat
van Bougis gesteld te arbeijden, heeft begeven, en bij aankomst aldaar
gezien hebbende dat gemelde Slammat, die daegs bevorens meede zeer traag
in den arbeijd was geweest, op de grond een pijp tabak zat te rooken
(zonder voor hem relatant op te staan) vroeg den relatant aan gemelde
Slammat hoe of hij het met hem had, of hij niet werken moeste, waarop
denzelven Slammat even over eijnde ging staan, antwoordende den
relatant: Ik werk altijd, ik moet ook wat rusten, daarbij voegende: Wil
baas mijn verkoopen, verkoopt mij maar; op hetwelke den relatant een
oude graaf, die in de thuijn was, in de hand genoomen en, onder het
zeggen: Canalje, durf gij mij dat zeggen, gemelde Slammat met het
bovenste, ofte het handgevat, van gezegde graef een slag op de linkerarm
toegebragt heeft, springende gedagte Slammat hierop ten eersten na den
relatant, en denzelven bij het linkerbeen gevat hebbende, rukte hij den
relatant aldus agterover tegen de grond, ziende hij relatant meteens dat
geciteerde Slammat een ontbloot mes in de hand had, met hetwelke hij een
en andermaal naar den relatant kwam te steeken, zonder hem nogthans te
konnen grieven, als verweerende den relatant zig dermaten, dat hij onder
des weder van de grond overeijnde is geraakt, en nademaal meergemelde
Slammat met het mes in de hand gedurig op den relatant afkwam, heeft den
relatant zig al agterwaarts geretireert, en met de in de hand hebbende
graef hem van het lijf gehouden, vallende hij relatant, door het
agterwaarts gaan, en eenelijk een paar sloffen aanhebbende, andermaal
agterover te neder, als wanneer meergemelde slaef telkens tragte hem
relatant te lijf te vallen, rakende den relatant zig, al verweerende,
weder van de grond, begevende zig op den eersten naer de wagter van
bovengemelde schapentroup, om denzelven te hulp te roepen, onder
hetwelke den relatant zag dat meergemelde Slammat, dig \[*sic*\] zig
middelerwijl naer huijs moet hebben begeven, uit het huis kwam, hebbende
in de eene hand een mes en in de andere hand een snaphaen, op welk
gezigt hij relatant voornoemde jongeling Christiaen Smal, die zig bij de
schapentroup bevond, gelaste om den daar digtbij wonende landbouwer
Abraham Peltzer te gaan roepen en waarschouwen, dat hij een snaphaan
moeste medebrengen. Dat, terwijl den relatant hierop bezig was zijn
paerd, dat digtbij huis gekniehaltert ging, op te vangen, gezien heeft
dat desselfs woonhuis reeds in den brand stond en dat dikwils gemelde
Slammat daeruijt kwam lopen, hebbende in de hand eenig brandende ruigte
of stroo, waarmeede hij zig eerst naar de looijerije en voorts naar de
paardestal begaf, welke bijde gebouwen denzelven Slammat met gemelde
brandstoffen in de daken \[*sic*\] te steken, of daar bij te houden,
insgelijks in den brand heeft gestoken, waarop den relatant zeer
verschrikt geraakt, zig ten eersten naer de plaats van voornoemde
Jourdaan heeft begeven, ontwaerende met gerepte Jourdaan die, op het
gezigt van het vuur van des relatants plaats, zig reeds op den weg near
hem bevond, terug gekomen zijnde, dat deszelfs huijs, looijerij en stal,
met de daerin geweest zijnde goedertjes, reeds in de assche waren
gelegt, zonder voormelde Slammat na dien tijd te hebben kunnen
verneemen, zijnde nogthans de loop van de snaphaan, die hij Slammat, als
voorzegt is, in de hand heeft gehad, nevens dies eijzere laedstok, onder
de verbrande goederen gevonden geworden.

Anders niet relateerende, geeft den relatant voor redenen van wetenschap
als in den text, berijd zijnde ’t voorenstaande, des begeerd wordende,
nader te zullen gestand doen.

Aldus gepasseert ter secretarije van Stellenbosch, den 14^e^ December
1759, ten overstaan van den substitut Coenraad Berkman en burger
Hermanus Combrink, als getuigen.

\[get.\] Andries Nolte.

Als getuijgen, \[get.\] C. Berkman, Hermanus Combrink.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] J.J. le Sueur, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable landdrost, Adriaan
van Schoor, by the burgher Andries Nolte, of competent age, containing
the following:

That during the afternoon of last Saturday, the 8^th^ of this month, the
testifier, who resides on his farm situated in Roodezand, \[was
waiting\] for the flock of sheep of the farmer Jan Jourdaen senior to be
brought to his farm, so that he could take a wether from it for his own
use. That when the testifier saw this flock of sheep approaching, he
ordered the young man who lives at his place, Christiaen Smal, to go and
assist the shepherd with driving them on. That hereupon the testifier
went to the garden, whither he had put his slave Slammat van Bougis to
work, and when he arrived there, he saw that the said Slammat, who on
the previous day was also very sluggish in his work, was sitting on the
ground smoking a pipe of tobacco (without getting up for the testifier).
The testifier asked the said Slammat what it was with him, if he ought
not to be working, whereupon the same Slammat at last stood upright,
answering the testifier: “I am always working, I also have to rest a
bit”, adding to this: “If *baas* wants to sell me, go ahead and do it”,
whereupon the testifier took an old spade, which was in the garden, in
his hand and, while saying: “*Canalje*,[^4] how dare you say that to
me”, gave the said Slammat with the top part or the handle of the spade
a blow on his left arm. Hereupon the said Slammat immediately stormed
towards the testifier and grabbed him by his left leg, thereby pulling
the testifier in this way to the ground, when the testifier suddenly saw
that the said Slammat had an unsheathed knife in his hand, with which he
once or twice stabbed in the direction of the testifier, without however
being able to pierce him. As the testifier resisted in such a way that,
during this, he again got up from the ground, and since the
aforementioned Slammat was continually rushing towards the testifier
with the knife in his hand, the testifier retreated backwards bit by bit
and kept him from his body with the spade he held in his hand, until the
testifier, in going backwards and because he was only wearing a pair of
slippers, again fell down backwards; which is when the aforementioned
slave repeatedly tried to attack him while the testifier, continuing to
defend himself, again got up from the ground and at once proceeded to
the shepherd of the aforementioned flock of sheep, in order to call for
help, during which the testifier saw Slammat, who meanwhile must have
gone into the house, coming from the house, having a knife in one of his
hands, and a musket in the other one. Seeing this, the testifier ordered
the aforementioned young man, Christiaen Smal, who was with the flock of
sheep, to go and call the farmer Abraham Peltzer, who lived close by,
and to warn him that he should bring a musket with him. That hereupon,
while the testifier was busy catching his horse which was going
knee-haltered[^5] close by the house, he saw that his house was
standing alight, and that the aforementioned Slammat came running out of
it, having in his hand some burning shrubs or straw, with which he first
went to the tan-yard and then to the horse stable, both of which
buildings the same Slammat also set alight by sticking the said burning
matter in the roof or holding it against it. Upon which the testifier
became most terrified and immediately set out to the farm of the
aforesaid Jourdaan; and saw, with the said Jourdaan – who was already on
his way when he sighted the fire on the farm of the testifier – when
they returned, that his house, tan-yard and stable, with everything in
them, were already lying in ashes, without being able to find the
aforesaid Slammat after this, although they did find amongst the burned
remains the barrel, as well as the iron ramrod, of the musket which
Slammat, as mentioned before, had held in his hand.

There being nothing further to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement in the text, being willing,
if so desired, to subsequently confirm the above.

Thus recorded in the office of the secretary in Stellenbosch on 14
December 1759 in the presence of the deputy Coenraad Berkman and the
burgher Hermanus Combrink, as witnesses.

\[signed\] Andries Nolte.

As witnesses, \[signed\] C. Berkman, Hermanus Combrink.

In my presence, \[signed\] J.J. le Sueur, secretary.

[^1]: * Another is 1793 Caesar van Madagascar.*

[^2]: * See 1717 Aaron van Bengalen, n. 1.** ***

[^3]: * This is the only testimony collected by the landdrost of
    Stellenbosch, and since Slammat had run away, the case was not sent
    to the Council of Justice. *

[^4]:  A fairly common term of abuse in eighteenth-century Cape
    documents, denoting a low-life person, from French *canaille*
    (scoundrel) (Boshoff & Nienaber 1967: 331).

[^5]:  Meaning that the horse’s legs were tied very loosely, in such a
    way that it could still graze, but not run away.
