# ACHILLES VAN DE WEST CUST ET AL.

*This is one of the most complex and revealing cases about slavery in
the criminal records of the Council of Justice.[^1] It involved
what one historian has described as a ‘minor slave uprising’, in
circumstances that greatly alarmed the authorities and
colonists.*[^2]

*The events involved a group of slave runaways on Table Mountain who
fought pitched battles with the burghers. They sent particular panic
through Cape Town when some of them, inspired by the revenge of Achilles
van de West Cust against his owner, murdered Michiel Smuts and his
family in their Oranjezicht home.[^3] After a series of encounters
with other slaves and skirmishes with commandos, some were killed (and
some summarily executed on the spot). Januarij van Boegies, the sole
survivor of the original gang, was brought to justice, together with
eleven other slaves who had later joined it or provided it with food or
support. The original group of runaways on Table Mountain had drawn over
twenty slaves into its net by this time. *

*A particularly intriguing aspect of the case is the role played by one
of the slaves, September van Boegies, whose interrogation is transcribed
here along with the *sententie*. Called ‘father’ by the others, he was
clearly a figure of authority, both because of his seniority in age and
because of his traditional Bugis medical knowledge. His interrogation is
unusually revealing of the cultural and social worlds of Southeast Asian
slaves at the Cape, including notions of kinship, medicine, language and
concepts of time.*

*Included in the court records is an intriguing document – a letter in
the Bougies language, written to September by another slave from
Bougies, one Upas, who lived in Stellenbosch.[^4] The content had
nothing to do with the case in question, but even the possession of a
letter written in a strange script and language from one Bougies slave
to another was considered by the authorities to be suspicious,
especially since they feared that reading and written communication
amongst slaves might facilitate an uprising.[^5] On the basis of
this evidence, September was accused of fostering revolt among the
Bougies slaves of the colony, and this was as alarming to the
authorities as the attack on the Smuts family. This accounts for
September’s gruesome execution: he had played no part in the attack on
the Smuts homestead, although he had subsequently provided the runaways
with food and medical assistance. *

**CJ 789** Sententiën, 1756-1760, ff. 268-93.

Nademaal Achilles van de West Cust, oud naar gissing 36 jaaren, slaaf
van wijlen den boekhouder Michiel Smuts, Januarij van Boegies, oud 40,
lijfeijgen van den burger Abraham Kraaijwinkel, September van Boegies,
oud 50, Januarij van Maccasser, oud 33, Isaac van Boegies, oud 44, Adam
van Sambouwa, oud 40, Manus van Mandhaar, oud 40, Matthijs van
Mallebaar, oud 30, Jacob van Madagascar, oud 45, en Gedult van de Caab,
oud 17 jaaren, alle agt slaven van de weeduwe wijlen den burger Adriaan
Heuning, mitsgaders Februarij van Boegies, oud 30, November van Boegies,
oud 25 jaaren, beijde lijfeijgen van den burger Jan le Roux de jonge, en
Cupido van Bengalen, slaaf van den burgerraad sieur Jan Meijndertsz
Cruijwagen, oud naar gissing 40 jaaren, alle thans ’s heeren gevangens,
buijten pijn of dwang van banden, van ijsers, dan wel de minste
bedreijging van dien, vrijwillig hebben beleeden, ende ’t den
edelagtbaaren Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements ook evidentelijk is
gebleeken:

Dat seedert eenigen tijd herwaards, soo van den ingeseteenen deeser
plaatse, als dien ten platten lande, sommige hunner lijfeijgenen
opgedrost, en de eenen vroeger, de andere laater, tot het getal van
vijfthien stux aan het Tafelgebergte bij den anderen gekoomen sijnde,
dat complot vervolgens, soo dra derselver schuijlhoek bekend geworden
was, door eenige burgers in een hol van den Windberg was geattacqueert,
en alle moeijte aangewend geworden om deselve te bemagtigen en gevangen
te neemen, sonder dat hetselve toenmaals, vermits derselven geweldige
resistentie, soo door ’t schieten met een pistool, als het neederwerpen
van swaare klippen op de voorseijde burgers, doenelijk was geweest, en
dat complot drossende slaven oversulx, nadat een hunner, in naame
Cardoes, toebehoorende den soldaat Hendrik Thomas, door gemelde burgers
doodgeschooten geworden was, het met der vlugt ontkoomen weesende, sig
voorts naar agter het Tafelgebergte in een ander hol geretireert had;
vanwaar een dier fielten, in naame Jacob van Boegies, lijfeijgen van den
burger Jan Smid, hem had begeeven naar de plaats van den burgercornet
Jacob van Rheenen, om ter hunner subsistentie uijt de kraal schaapen te
steelen, als wanneer op denselven, bij ’t te werk stellen sijner
voorgenoomen diefte, was geschooten en soodanig gequest \[*sic*\]
geworden, dat kort daarop aan ’t gebergte aan de ontfangene wonden
overleeden sijnde, dat complot toen nog derthien stux gebleeven was.

Dat onder dat complot meede gesorteerd hebbende een slave jongen van den
landbouwer Cornelis Verweij, in naame Fortuijn van Boegies, die gemelde
sijn lijfheer, voor nu ruijm een jaar voorleeden, gevaarlijk gequetst
hebbende, het alsdoen met der vlugt ontkoomen en seedert door dit
complot. als hun capitain aangestelt geworden was, gemelde Fortuijn, aan
sijn complot fielten voorgestelt had de noodsaakelijkheijd om geweer te
soeken en magtig te worden; den, onder dien troup sig meede bevindende,
slave jongen van wijlen den boekhouder Michiel Smuts, in naame Cupido
van Bougies, daarop aan de hand had gegeeven om, ten eijnde dat te
bekoomen, sijn gemelde, in desselfs thuijn woonenden, lijfheer te gaan
vermoorden; welke propositie door het geheele complot goedgekeurt
sijnde, hetselve sig op den 14^e^ der jongst gepasseerde maand Julij,
teegens den avond, uijt hun hol begeeven en de cours naar voormelde
thuijn genoomen hebbende, de klocke wel seeven uuren, in eene niet verre
van dien thuijn afleggende sloot gearriveert was, alwaar hun eenigen
tijd verborgen gehouden hadden, middelerwijl dat voormelde Cupido van
Boegies hem naar de thuijn van sijn voormelde leijfheer vervoegt en,
niet lang daarna terug keerende, tot bij de craal, werwaarts het geheele
complot intusschen in den donkeren was genadert, met hem meede gebragt
had een ander slave jongen, in naame Achilles, sijnde den eerste
gevangen, met wien alsdoen het gemelde complot afgesprooken had om
voormelde Smuts te vermoorden; invoegen den eersten gevangen, niet
alleen in dien moord toegestemd, en nog substantieelijk daarbij gevoeg
had: Ja! Ik heb mijn baas al lang willen dood maaken, en nu sal hij
sterven!, maar ook vooraf naar ’t woonhuijs terug gekeerd sijnde, alles
in ’t werk had gesteld, wat tot het faciliteeren van dien moord strecken
konde; aangesien denselven niet slegts een oude slaven jongen, in naame
Baatjoe van Balij, die op dat moment, wanneer hij eerste gevangen in de
combuijs quam, buijten gaan wilde om sijn meesters paard voeder te
geeven, onder ’t seggen: Gij moet niet buijten gaan, want daar is soo
veel volk buijten!, daarin weederhouden, maar ook opstonds de, in de
combuijs brandende, lamp uijtgebluscht had; invoegen de, inmiddens tot
voor de combuijs deur genadert sijnde slave jongens, Cupido van Boegies
met sijne mackers bovengemelde Fortuijn van Boegies en eenen Baloc,
dewelke meergemelde Cupido eeven als gevleugelt hadden vastgehouden, de
klokke omtrent agt uuren, door de donkere combuijs heen tot in ’t
voorhuijs gegaan waaren, alwaar die drie fielten niet alleen dikwels
gemelde Smuts, die aldaar gerust had sitten schreijven, mitsgaders
desselfs, naas hem op een stoel geseeten hebbende, huijsvrouw, maar ook
een kleijn soontje, ’twelk op een daar digtbij staande stoel te slaapen
leggende, onder ’t gruwelijk vermoorden van desselfs vader en moeder
ontwaakt was en te schreeuwen begonnen had, op de afschuwelijkste wijse
om ’t leeven gebragt, vervolgens van hun complot, door het welk
geduurende het volbrengen dier wreede moorden van buijten het huijs was
beset gehouden, nog twee, in naame Julij en Adonis, daar binnen
geroepen, het huijs gespolieert en, behalven drie snaphaanen, kruijt en
loot, ook kleederen, en uijt een kabinet, linnen, silvere leepels,
mitsgaders eenig ander silvergoed en wes meer, gerooft hadden; met alle
welke goederen het geheele complot moordenaars, onder dewelke den
tweeden gevangen Januarij, die voor nu omtrent een jaar voorleeden, naar
maar een korten tijd hier te lande geweest te sijn, van sijn voorseijde
lijfheer is gaan opdrossen, meede sorteerde, opstonds daarop vanuijt het
huijs en thuijn geretireert weesende, sig sonder naar ’t gebergte terug
te keeren, begeeven had naar de Blaauwebergsduijnen, alwaar sijlieden
hun eenigen dagen verschoolen gehouden en geërneert hadden, soo met
mosselen, die deselve aan strand quaamen te soeken, als met eenige
schaapen, die sommige dier moordenaaren uijt Jan Biesjeskraal hadden
gestoolen, mitsgaders met soodanige kost als sijlieden eens aan de
Plattecloof van eenige slaven van de weeduwe Heuning waaren gaan haalen;
welke slaven dat complot reets seedert een geruijmen tijd bevoorens van
kost en tabak hadden voorsien, en door sommige hunner, gewoonlijk ’s
Vrijdaags, van omtrent de Plattecloof, uijt de aldaar staande bosjes,
afgehaald geworden was.

Dat het complot moordenaren, weijnige dagen daarna, aldaar ontdekt en
door derwaards gesondene, soo ’s edele Compagnies militairen, als
burgeren, in een groote duijn of bos soo veel doenelijk beset geworden
sijnde, hetselve sig teegens voorseijde commando niet alleen hadden te
weer gesteld, maar ook een der grenadiers dood geschooten; dog dat
insgelijx twee dier fielten, genaamt Baloc van den burger Jochem Daniel
Hubenaar en Jamil, toebehoorende de weeduwe Dorse, door ’t commando
waaren dood geschooten geworden, terwijl de overige elf, ’s nagts in den
donkeren, hun kans waarneemende, het voor alsdoen met de vlugt ontkoomen
waaren, hun ’s volgenden avonds begeeven hebbende tot digt bij de plaats
van de weeduwe Heuning, aldaar gesprooken hadden met den derde gevangen
September, die, vermits een oude jongen is, door de verdere slaven van
de weeduwe Heuning “Vader” genoemd, en als soodanig gehouden wordende,
onder praetext, om hout te gaan haalen, uijtgegaan was; welke
eevengemelde September, wanneer bij sijn meede slaaven terug was
gekoomen, tot deselve substantieelijk gesegt had: Daar sijn de drossers
op ’t veld, die moeten kost hebben; sulx den vierden gevangen Januarij,
soo als hij segt, hem daarop, beneevens twee sijner meede slaven, in
naame Matthijs en Jacob, met kost derwaards begeeven, op ’t land drie
dier drossers, in naame Fortuijn, Julij en Adonis aangetroffen, en de
meede genoomene kost aan deselve overhandigt had, sonder de verdere
drossers te hebben gesien, ter saake deselve hen elders verder af souden
verborgen gehouden hebben; sijnde kort daarop in ’t slaven huijs op de
plaats De Plattecloof binnen gekoomen, den onder dat complot
moordenaaren meede gesorteerd hebbende slave jongen Baatjoe van Boegies,
denwelken in de gedaane resistentie teegens het commando door sijn hand
geschooten weesende, desselfs quetsuur door den derden gevangen
September, naar deselve alvoorens op de Boegineese wijse gesuijvert te
hebben, was verbonden en voorts dien nagt, door eevengemelde September,
boven de backoven, om op de kooij van den slaaf Jacob te slaapen,
geborgen geworden.

Dat de van de geheele complot nog in leeven geweest sijnde elf fielten,
vervolgens weederom aan het Tafelgebergte bij den anderen gekoomen
weesende, deselve naar twee nagten aldaar vertoeft te hebben, vandaar
vertrocken sijn naar de Caabse duijnen, alwaar sijlieden van seekere in
eene kraal, om hout te roeijen, sig bevindende slave jongens, kost
gevraagt en bekoomen hebbende, een dier slaven soo ras dat complot
vertrocken was, sig Caabwaarts en van derselver genoomene route kennis
gegeeven had, waardoor het opnieuws op die moordenaaren uijtgesondene
commando in staat was gestelt geworden, deselve in de duijnen, omtrent
de soogenoemde Swarte Klip, te agterhaalen en te attacqueeren, dog dat
dewijl niet geschroomd hadden, opnieuws gewelddadige resistentie teegens
dat commando te pleegen, seeven, in naame Fortuijn, toebehoord hebbende
den landbouwer Cornelis Verweij, Patientie van den burger Willem Engels,
April van de meede burger Jan Smid, Cupido van bovengemelde Smuts, Julij
van den soldaat Bergman, Adonis van de weeduwe Rotenburg, en Christiaan
van d’ edele Compagnie, daarvan soo dood geschooten, als andersins om ’t
leeven geraakt, en de overige vier, genaamt April van Bima van Adam
Ceijse \[*sic*\], September van Balij van Hendrik Ridder, Baatjoe van
Jan Smid, en Januarij van Abraham Craaijwinkel, gequetst gevangen
genoomen geworden waaren; van welke laatste, de twee eerstgemelde,
vermits om derselver swaare wonden *periculum in mora* was, *illico*
hunne welverdiende straffe hebben ontfangen, en de lijken der gedoode,
soo wel als den, seedert door eene hem schielijk overgekoomene siekte,
overleedene Baatjoe van Boegies, ten spectacul van andere boosdoenders,
ook naar omstandigheijd van saaken sijn geëxecuteerd geworden; invoegen
van dat geheele complot moordenaaren alleenlijk den tweeden gevangen
Januarij van Boegies is koomen in ’t leeven te blijven.

Dat den derden gevangen September van Boegies, die als schaapewagter
sijner lijfvrouw op haar voorseijde plaats, aan de Plattecloof
bescheijden geleegen,[^6] en met het voorseijde complot drossers en
moordenaaren in ’t veld de eerste kennisse gekreegen hebbende, niet
alleen sijne meede slaaven, in naame Januarij van Maccasser, Matthijs
van Mallebaar, Adam van Sambouwa, Jacob van Madagascar. Manus van
Mandhaar, Isaac van Boegies, en Gedult van de Caab, ofte den 4^e^, 5^e^,
6^e^, 7^e^, 8^e^, 9^e^ en 10^e^ gevangens, daarvan kennis gegeeven, maar
bovensdien besorgt had, dat het voorseijde complot drossers, soowel een
geruijmen tijd voor, als ook naar, ’t volbrengen der wreede moorden aan
wijlen den boekhouder Michiel Smuts, desselfs huijsvrouw en kind, door
hem en bovengemelde sijne meede slaven, mitsgaders twee slaven van den
burger Jan le Roex \[*sic*\] de jonge, genaamd Februarij en November,
ofte de 11^e^ en 12^e^ gevangens, dewelke den 3^e^ en 4^e^ gevangens
September en Januarij daartoe hadden versogt en overgehaald, van kost
voorsien geworden sijnde, zijlieden deselve op alderhande wijse van
hunne lijfvrouw en lijfheer ontstoolen, en, invoegen voorseijde, aan dat
complot ter hand gestelt hadden.

Dat de 10 laatstgemelde gevangens wel verre, om, in steede van dat
complot te onderhouden, volgens hun pligt ter behoorlijke plaatse
daarvan kennis te geeven, als wanneer het selve vroegtijdig had kunnen
agterhaald, gevangen genoomen, en dus alle het verdere quaad verhindert
werden, niet alleen van meergemelde complot, dikwils sommige, en eens in
sijn geheel, alle voorsien met diverse wapenen, bij nagt en onteijden in
’t slavenhuijs op de plaats van de weeduwe Heuning hadden laaten koomen;
maar, boven en behalven, dat den derden en vierden gevangens September
en Januarij, door twee van dat complot waaren verwittigt geworden, dat
sij, om geweer, kruijd en loot te bekoomen van voorneemens waaren, de
thuijn van voormelde Smuts, de Windmoolen, en de plaats van Claas Jonasz
te willen afloopen, nog in dat slavenhuijs, voor soo veel de voormelde
slaven van de weeduwe Heuning betreft, principalijk door ’t toedoen en
voorstelling van voormelde September, aan sijne meede slaven met dat
complot drossers afgesprooken hadden om, soo dra de warme tijd aanquam,
of soo als sommige der gevangens seggen, wanneer de gars rijp geworden
sijn soude, met het meergemelde complot drossers en moordenaaren op een
lange reijse naar ’t Caffers land te gaan opdrossen, hebbende
meergemelde September en Januarij, vervolgens den 11^e^ en 12^e^
gevangens Februarij en November van Jan le Roex, en eevengemelde
September, nog bovensdien den 13^e^ gevangen, genaamt Cupido van
Bengalen, toebehoorende den burgerraad, sieur Jan Meijndertsz
Cruijwagen, insgelijx daartoe aangesogt, welke eevengemelde Cupido,
nietteegenstaande hij in den jaare 1738 over eeven soodanigen misdaad
reets bij deesen edelagtbaaren Raad gecondemneert en op de justitie
plaats alhier gegeesselt geworden is, egter soowel als de bovengemelde
gevangens daarin vrijwillig toegestemd had, soekende eenelijk den 7^e^
en 10^e^ gevangens Jacob van Madagascar en Gedult van de Caab, onder
sinisterlijke voorgeevinge dat door September en Januarij door
drijgementen daartoe waaren gedwongen geworden, hun daarvan te
verschoonen; invoegen de twaalf laatste gevangens alle van voorneemen
geweest waaren dien togt te onderneemen, tot denwelken meergemelde
September had op hem genoomen, teegens dien tijd te sullen besorgen,
niet alleen dat nog meer slaven van sijne natie derwaards quaamen meede
te gaan, maar ook dat sijlieden als dan soodanig kruijd als sig op de
plaats sijner lijfvrouw de weeduwe Heuning soude moogen bevinden, meede
neemen souden; sonder dat den gevangens egter van eenige voorgenoomen
geweldpleeging, ingevalle sijlieden sulx niet heijmelijk hadden kunnen
magtig worden, den regten ter genoegen weeten willen; hebbende den
derden gevangen September egter bekend dat hij aan de kok op de plaats
sijner lijfvrouw, in naam Slammat, om kruijd had gevraagt, sonder
hetselve bekoomen te hebben. En overmits hij September onder de slaven
van de Boegies natie hier te lande als docter geageert, en bovensdien
aan alle de slaven dier natie, die hem diesweegens waaren koomen
versoeken, briefjes, dewelke tot dat poinct souden dienen, en
geschreeven in de Boegineese taal, meede gedeelt had, het denselven
oversulx seer gemakkelijk gevallen sijn soude, onder dat praetext, een
goed getal sijner natie tot het vermeerderen van sijn complot op te
rooijen, mitsgaders hun vervolgens door alderhande wreedheeden te
bedreijven, een weg ter volvoeringe hunner onderlinge beraamde
gevaarlijke en landbederffelijke desseijnen te baanen, bij aldien
deselve niet in tijds ontdekt, door behoorlijke middelen geluckig
verijdelt geworden; en de gevangens in handen van justitie waaren koomen
te geraaken.

Alle ’twelke sijnde gruwelijke daaden waardoor de algemeene rust deeser
landen grootelijx gestoord, en de goede ingeseetenen in angst en vreese
gesteld geworden sijnde, dierhalven niet ongestraft kunnen gelaaten,
maar daarenteegen, ten spiegel en afschrik van andere fielten en
boosewigten \[*sic*\], op ’t rigoureuste moeten gepunieerd worden.

Soo is ’t dat den edelagtbaaren Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements,
ten dage dienende, aandagtelijk hebbende geleesen ende geresumeert, den
schriftelijken crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie, door den heer
Independent Fiscaal, Pieter van Reede van Oudshoorn, *nomine officii*,
op ende jeegens de gevangens gedaan ende genoomen, weijders geleth op
alle hetgeene ter materie dienende was en haar edelagtbaarens konde doen
moveren, doende regt uijt naame ende van weegens de hoogmoogende Heeren
Staaten Generaal der Vereenigde Neederlanden, alle de gevangens hebben
gecondemneert, gelijk haar edelagtbaarens deselve condemneeren mits
deesen: omme gebragt te worden \[*sic*\] ter plaatse alwaar men alhier
gewoon is crimineele gewijsdens ter executie te leggen, en aldaar den
scherpregter overgeleevert zijnde, den 1^e^ gevangen Achilles van de
West Cust op een kruijs gebonden, en op agt diverse plaatsen met
gloeijende tangen geneepen sijnde, voorts van onder op, sonder slag van
gratie, leevendig geleedebraakt te worden; weijders den 2^e^, 3^e^ en
4^e^ gevangens ieder meede op een kruijs gebonden weesende, den 2^e^ en
3^e^ gevangens Januarij en September van Boegies van onder op, sonder,
en den 4^e^ gevangen Januarij van Macasser, met de slag van gratie,
leevendig geleedebraakt te werden, mitsgaders op de kruijssen te blijven
leggen, totdat den geest sullen hebben gegeeven; voorts de 5^e^, 6^e^,
7^e^, 8^e^, 9^e^, 10^e^, 11^e^ en 12^e^ gevangens Isaac van Boegies,
Adam van Sambouwa, Manus van Mandhaar, Matthijs van Mallebaar, Jacob van
Madagascar, Gedult van de Caab, Februarij van Boegies en November van
Boegies, soodanig met de koorde aan de galg te werden gestraft, dat er
de dood na volgt; vervolgens de doode lichaamen van alle de gevangens
naar ’t buijten geregt gesleept, die der vier eerste gevangens op
raderen gestelt, en de lichaamen der agt volgende gevangens, weeder aan
de galg opgehangen sijnde, dus te verblijven ten prooije van de lugt en
vogelen des heemels.

Weijders den 13^e^ gevangen Cupido van Bengalen omme met de strop om den
hals onder de galg ten pronk gesteld, en voorts aan een paal gebonden,
met roeden op de bloote rugge strengelijk gegeesselt, mitsgaders daarop
gebrandmerkt en vervolgens voor den tijd van tien agtereenvolgende
jaaren in de ketting geklonken weesende, sijn lijfheer te huijs gesonden
te werden; met condemnatie van alle de gevangens in de kosten en misen
van justitie, ontseggende den Raad den anders gedaanen eijsch van den
heer Officier ten opsigte van den laatsten gevangen.

Aldus gedaan en gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 4^e^
September 1760 mitsgaders gepronuntieert ende g’executeert den 6^e^
daaraanvolgende.

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] R. Tulbagh.

\[get.\] J. Meinertzhagen, R.S. Allemann, Cl. Brand, D. d’Aillij, Jn.
Fr. Tiemmendorf, Pieter Coningh, P. Hacker, H.L. Bletterman, Jn.
Haszingh, J.M. Cruijwagen.

Mij present, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

**CJ 373** Criminele Process Stukken, 1760, Deel 2, ff. 85-95v.

Interrogatoriën, gedaan maaken en aan d’ edele gecommitteerde leeden
uijt den edelegtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements,
overgegeeven, omme daarop, ter requisitie, van den Independent Fiscaal
Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, gehoort en ondervraagt te werden, den slaaf
September, zullende sijne te geevene responsiven in margine deeses
moeten bekent gestelt werden.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, September van
Boegies, denwelken op de onderstaande vraagpoincten soodanig geantwoord
heeft, als beseijden deselve staat aangeteekent.

Articul 1: Hoe sijn gevangens naam, ouderdom en geboorteplaats is?  
Antwoord: September van Boegies, oud naar gissing vijftig jaaren.

Articul 2: Wiens lijfeijgen hij gevangen is?

Antwoord: Van de weeduwe Adriaan Heuning.

Articul 3: Hoe langen tijd het geleeden is dat hij gevangen de eerste
reijse kennisse aan dat complot drossers gekreegen heeft, en waar hij
deselve eerst heeft gesprooken gehad?

Antwoord: ’t Is naar de ploegtijd geweest dat ik haar de eerste maal
onder de Platte Cloof gesprooken heb.

Articul 4: Hoe sterk zijlieden waaren toen hij deselven voor de eerste
reijse gesprooken heeft?

Antwoord: Drie.

Articul 5: Aan wie die drossende slaaven sijn toebehoorende, en hoe
deselven genaamt sijn?

Antwoord: Een van Bergman, een van Verweij, en Adonis.

Articul 6: Of onder die drossende slaven zig niet bevonden heeft een
slave jongen, Fortuijn genaamt, dewelken, nu omtrent een groot jaar
geleeden, desselfs lijfheer Cornelis Verweij met een mes heeft gequetst
gehad?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 7: Of deese genoemde Fortuijn zijn gevangens broeder of halve
broeder is?

Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 8: Soo neen, waarom sijlieden dan elkander altoos soo genoemt
hebben?

Antwoord: Omdat het onder de Boegineesen de gewoonte is.

Articul 9: Hoe sterk dat complot drossende slaven wel geweest is?

Antwoord: Derthien stux.

Articul 10: Hoe langen tijd hij gevangen die drossende slaven van kost
en toback heeft voorsien gehad?

Antwoord: Twee weeken, buijten en behalven wat se van de andere slaven
bekoomen hebben.

Articul 11: Of die slaven, terwijl in de Blaauwebergs duijnen hun
ophielden, niet nog eens kost bij hem gevangen en desselfs mackers aan
de Platte Cloof gehaald hebben?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 12: Hoe dikwils die drossers bij hem gevangen in ’t slavenhuijs
geweest sijn?  
Antwoord: Twee maal.

Articul 13: Of niet eens ses, en dan nog eens derthien stux van die
drossers bij hem in ’t slavenhuijs geweest sijn?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 14: Hoe de ses drossers die bij hem gevangen de eerste reijse in
’t slavenhuijs geweest sijn, geheeten hebben, en wiens lijfeijgenen zij
geweest sijn, die te noemen.

Antwoord: Julij, Fortuijn, Adonis, de andere drie ken ik niet.

Articul 15: Hoe die jonge is genaamt, die op sijn gevangens of Isaaks
kooij heeft sitten schrijven?

Antwoord: Julij.

Articul 16: Of het niet is geweest Julij van Bergman?

Antwoord: Als vooren.

Articul 17: Of de jongen van Cornelis Verweij, Fortuijn genaamt, daar
ook niet bij praesent is geweest?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 18: Of hij gevangen teegens voornd. Julij niet heeft gesegt
gehad wat dat hij schrijven moeste?

Antwoord: Fortuijn heeft het mij voorgesegt.

Articul 19: Of hij gevangen aan Adonis ook geen briefje gegeeven
heeft?  
Antwoord: Aan Adonis niet, maar Julij heeft een briefje aan Januarij
gegeeven.

Articul 20: Wat in dat briefje geschreeven was?

Antwoord: Niets anders dan dat hij sijn lichaam daardoor voor quaad
bewaaren konde.

Articul 21: Wat afspraak zijlieden te dier tijd onder elkander genoomen
hebben?

Antwoord: De drossers hebben mij versogt, om meede te drossen, dog ik
heb het niet willen doen.

Articul 22: Waarmeede te dier tijd gemelde slaven sijn gewapent geweest?

Antwoord: Sij hebben geen geweer meede gebragt.

Articul 23: Of omtrent 14 dagen daarna, niet weederom door hem gevangen
in ’t slavenhuijs binnen gebragt sijn, 13 à 14 drossers, waaronder sig
ook bevonden hebben die ses drossers die veerthien dagen bevoorens in ’t
slavenhuijs geweest waaren?

Antwoord: Ja, derthien.

Articul 24: Wie de kaars te dier tijd in ’t slavenhuijs heeft
uijtgedaan?

Antwoord: De kaars is brandende gebleeven.

Articul 25: Of zulks door Januarij niet is verrigt geworden?

Antwoord: Als vooren.

Articul 26: Of hij gevangen, terwijl de drossers in zijn cagie,[^7]
alwaar hij een kaars had, aan Julij niet een briefje heeft overhandigt?

Antwoord: Neen! Julij heeft sijn eijgen brief geleesen.

Articul 27: Waarmeede sij te dier tijd sijn gewapent geweest?

Antwoord: Sij hadden messen op zeijde, en niets anders.

Articul 28: Of zij niet gewapent sijn geweest met een pistool, vier à
vijf assegaaijen, mitsgaders ieder met een parrang, of soogenaamde kris,
op de broeksband?

Antwoord: Als op ’t voorgaande articul.

Articul 29: Wat voor onderlinge afspraak zij alstoen onder elkander
genoomen hebben?

Antwoord: Sij hebben teegens mij gesegt: Gaat mee.

Articul 30: Of zulx principaal niet gerouleert heeft om met elkander
naar ’t Caffers land te gaan?  
Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 31: Teegens wat tijd hun voorneemen wel geweest is, die reijse
aan te neemen?

Antwoord: Teegens dat de garst rijp is.

Articul 32: Of zulx door hunlieden niet is bestemt geworden teegens dat
de garst in d’ aijren quam?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 33: Wie van hun geselschap soude sijn geweest, die te noemen.  
Antwoord: Jacob, Manus, Isaac, Adam, Februarij en November, bijde van
Jan le Roux; dog ik gevraagde, heb niet willen mee gaan, en van Matthijs
en Gedult weet ik niet af.

Articul 34: Of hiertoe niet hunne toestemming gegeeven hebben, de
voormelde drossende slaven, hij gevraagde, neevens sijne meede slaven:
Januarij, Jacob, Isaac, Manus, Matthijs en Gedult, en nog twee slaven
van den burger Jan le Roux, Februarij en November genaamt?

Antwoord: Als op ’t voorgaande articul.

Articul 35: Wie nog meer op deese reijse met hunlieden zoude meegegaan
sijn, die te noemen.

Antwoord: Niemand meer.

Articul 36: Of den slave jongen in naame Cupido, toebehoorende sieur
Cruijwagen, ook meede gaan soude?

Antwoord: Dien jongen heeft mij gevangen aangesprooken, en gesegt dat,
soo ik meede ging, hij Cupido ook gaan soude, dat hij Cupido Hottentots
spreeken konde en de weg naar ’t Caffers land wist.

Articul 37: Of hij gevangen, omme nog meer van sijn Boegineese natie aan
te zoeken, op den 27 der gepasseerde maand Julij niet aan de Caab zoude
gegaan zijn?  
Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 38: Of niet door hem gevangen, en een van de capitains van het
complot drossers, afspraak genoomen is omme geweijr te verkrijgen, de
plaats van Smuts, de Windmoolen, en Claas Jonas af te loopen?  
Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 39: Of hij gevangen aan den kok Slamat \[*sic*\] niet om kruijt
gevraagt heeft?  
Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 40: Wat die kok hem gevangen daarop voor antwoord gegeven
heeft?  
Antwoord: Als vooren.

Articul 41: Of hij gevangen niet voorneemens geweest is, met behulp
sijner complicen, omme het daar berustende kruijt magtig te worden,
desselfs lijfvrouw de weduwe Heuning den knegt te vermoorden, vervolgens
de plaats af te loopen en het zig daar bevindende geweer meede te
neemen?  
Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 42: Met wie hij gevangen alhier aan de Caab ten principale
conversatie gehouden heeft?  
Antwoord: Met eene Maaij Sila, een Chineese vrouw, woonende over de
wooning van den slagter Bergman, aan dewelke ik altijd uijen brenge.

Articul 43: Of het niet geweest is met een Chineese vrouw, maaij Siele
\[*sic*\] genaamt, die hem door Isaac ontbooden heeft?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 44: Of dien eijgensten avond, wanneer het complot moordenaars
het commando ontsnapt was, nadat alvoorens, ter sijner ordre, door
Januarij, Jacob en Matthijs aan die drossers, te weeten Fortuijn, Julij
en Adonis, kost gebragt was, een van die gaauwdieven, met naam \[*sic*\]
Baatjoe van den burger Smit, dewelke in den arm gequetst was, bij hem
niet in ’t slavenhuijs gekoomen is?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 45: Of hij gevangen, als zijnde een doctor, gemelden Baatjoe
niet verbonden en vervolgens die nagt een slaapplaats op de kooij van
Jacob heeft aangeweesen?

Antwoord: Ik heb op de wonde op de Boegineese wijse gespuuwt, maar ik
heb de doek afgemaakt, en daarna met de neusdoek van Baatjoe weeder
verbonden.

Articul 46: Of zijn meede slaaf Januarij geen aangenoomen zoon van hem
gevangen is?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 47: Of hij gevangen aan Januarij niet een zilveren soupleepel,
daer de steel afgebrooken was, in bewaring heeft gegeven?

Antwoord: Den drosser Christiaan heeft hem aan mij gegeven, en Januarij
heeft dien van mij gevraagt.

Articul 48: Of hij gevangen aan gemelde sijnen aangenoomen soon niet een
briefje heeft overgegeven, onder ’t seggen: Dat stuurt jou Julij?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 49: Wat den inhoud van dat briefje is geweest?

Antwoord: Dat dat briefje goed voor de siekte was.

Articul 50: Of het aan hem tans vertoont werdende briefje, ’twelk in de
Boegineese taal geschreeven is, hem niet is toebehoorende?

Antwoord: Ja.

Articul 51: Soo neen, bij wat toeval dat briefje in sijn kist is
gekoomen?

Antwoord: Als vooren.

Articul 52: Of die opschrift niet behelst: Van ’t volk aan September,
aan de Platte Cloof?

Antwoord: Ik kan niet leesen.

Articul 53: Of hij gevangen niet Bouginees leesen of schrijven kan?  
Antwoord: Neen, dog als mij een voorbeeld voorgelegt word, kan ik het
naschrijven.

Articul 54: Van wie hem dat briefje is toegesonden?

Antwoord: Van een jongen van Stellenbosch, genaamt Oepas, dog wie aan
mij denselven gebragt heeft, is mij onbekent.

Articul 55: Wat den inhoud van dat briefje behelst?

Antwoord: Dewijl de slaaf Oepas altijd siek was, heeft denselven mij
versogt bij hem te koomen.

Articul 56: Wat reedenen hij gevangen gehad heeft toen den heer
requirant hem voor de eerste reijse na dat complot ondervraagt heeft, te
zeggen, dat maar neegen stux sterk en seeven daarvan swaar gequetst
waaren?

Antwoord: Ik had dat van Christiaan gehoord.

Articul 57: Of zulx niet geweest is om den heer requirant hierdoor te
misleijden?

Antwoord: Neen.

Articul 58: Of hij gevangen niet als hoofd van sijn complot soude
g’ageert hebben?

Antwoord: Ja, ik ben daartoe door mijn huijs volk versogt geworden,
sijnde die slaven genoemt als op articul 33.

Articul 59: Wat reedenen hij gevangen gehad heeft zulke pernicieuse
desseinen in ’t werk te stellen?  
Antwoord: Ik heb niet willen drossen.

Articul 60: Of hij gevangen thans niet bekennen moet over het t’ samen
spannen en kost geeven aan een complot van 13 à 14 moordenaaren, ’t
oprocken sijner meede slaven, mitsgaders ook hun onderlingen
voorgenoomene pernicieuse desseinen om na ’t Caffers land op te drossen,
eenige plaatsten af te loopen, ’t geweer en kruijt weg te neemen, en al
wie haar op weg mog te koomen teegenstaan, te vermoorden, ten hoogsten
strafbaar te weesen?

Antwoord: Over ’t saamen spannen met het complot moordenaaren en ’t
geeven van kost, beken ik strafbaar te weesen; maar aan ’t oprockenen
mijner meede slaven heb ik geen schuld en, omdat ik wist dat het quaad
was, heb ik niet willen meede gaan naar ’t Caffers land; dog van ’t
afloopen van plaatsen en van ’t vermoorden van menschen weet ik niet af;
maar ik heb van de andere slaven wel gehoord dat se het kruijt van haar
plaats soude willen meede neemen, maar ik heb daarin niet toegestemt.

Aldus gevraagt en b’antwoord in de Boegineese taal, door Pieter Matthijs
Pieterssoon in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 9^e^ Augustus 1760, voor d’
edele P. Hacker en Jn. Haszingh, leeden uijt den edeleagtbaare Raad van
Justitie, voormeld, die deeses, beneevens den g’interrogeerden,
mitsgaders voormelde tolk P.M. Pietersoon, ende mij, secretaris, meede
behoorlijk hebben gesubcribeert.

’Twelk ik getuijgen, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelachtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den slaaf
September van Boegies, denwelken deese voorenstaande interrogatoriën met
sijne daarop gegeevene responsiven, van woorde tot woorde klaar en
duijdelijk voorgeleesen weesende, verklaarde daarbij volkoomen te
persisteeren, niet begeerende dat er iets meer bijgevoegt ofte van
gedaan werden sal, als alleenig: dat hij van sins geweest is meede op te
drossen; dat hij van de kok kruijt heeft gevraagt, dog sonder denselven
bedrijgt te hebben; dat Baatjoe van Smid op de oven geslaapen heeft; dat
den confessant sig aan ’t oprocken sijner meede slaven schuldig kent en,
eijndelijk, dat het afloopen van plaatsen en ’t vermoorden van de
menschen nog niet vast afgesprooken geweest was, en betuijgde alle ’t
voorenstaande de waarheijd te weesen.

Aldus gerecolleerd in de Maleijtsche taal en door als vooren vertolkt,
in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 12^e\ ^Augustus 1760.

Dit X is ’t merk van September van Boegies.

Voor de vertolking, \[get.\] P.M. Pietersoon.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] P. Hacker, Jn. Haszingh.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Since Achilles van de West Cust, 36 years old at a guess, slave of the
late *boekhouder* Michiel Smuts, Januarij van Boegies, age 40, bondsman
of the burgher Abraham Kraaijwinkel, September van Boegies, age 50,
Januarij van Maccasser, age 33, Isaac van Boegies, age 44, Adam van
Sambouwa, age 40, Manus van Mandhaar, age 40, Matthijs van Mallebaar,
age 30, Jacob van Madagascar, age 45, and Gedult van de Caab, 17 years
old, all eight slaves of the widow of the late burgher Adriaan Heuning,
besides Februarij van Boegies, age 30, November van Boegies, 25 years
old, both bondsmen of the burgher Jan le Roux, junior, and Cupido van
Bengalen, slave of the burgher councillor, *sieur* Jan Meijndertsz
Cruijwagen, 40 years old at a guess, all currently their honours’
prisoners, have voluntarily confessed, without torture or force of
bonds, of irons, or even the least threat of suchlike, and since it has
also appeared evident to the honourable Council of Justice of this
government:

That since some time ago, certain of the bondsmen of both the
inhabitants of this place and those of the rural areas ran away from
their owners and, some earlier, some later, congregated with one another
at Table Mountain until they reached the number of fifteen men. That
this gang was then, as soon as their hiding place became known, attacked
in a cavern of the Windberg[^8] by some burghers who used every means
possible to overpower and capture them, without, however, being
successful at this time on account of their vehement resistance – both
through shooting with a pistol and by throwing down heavy stones on the
aforesaid burghers – and because this gang of runaway slaves escaped by
fleeing after one of theirs, by the name of Cardoes, belonging to the
soldier Hendrik Thomas, was shot dead by the said burghers, and who then
retreated to the back of Table Mountain to a different cavern. From
where one of these scoundrels, by the name of Jacob van Boegies,
bondsman of the burgher Jan Smid, proceeded to the farm of the burgher
cornet Jacob van Rheenen, in order to steel sheep from the corral for
their subsistence, which is when, while he was executing his intended
theft, he was shot and wounded in such a way that he died shortly
thereafter in the mountain from the wounds he received, after which
there remained in that gang still thirteen men.

That one of the men who belonged to this gang was a slave *jongen* of
the farmer Cornelis Verweij, by the name of Fortuijn van Boegies, who,
fully a year ago, had dangerously wounded his said owner and then
escaped by fleeing, and since then had been appointed by this gang as
their captain. The said Fortuijn suggested to his gang of scoundrels the
necessity of looking for and obtaining guns, whereupon the slave
*jongen* of the late *boekhouder* Michiel Smuts, by the name of Cupido
van Bougies, then suggested to them that, in order to obtain these, they
should go and murder his said owner who lives on his garden-plot; which
proposal was approved by the whole gang. On the 14^th^ of the recently
passed month July they set out by evening from their cavern and took
their course to the aforementioned garden-plot and arrived at seven
o’clock in a ditch situated not far from it. Here they kept themselves
hidden for some time while the aforementioned Cupido van Boegies
proceeded to the garden-plot of his aforementioned owner and returned,
not long after that, to the corral, whither the whole gang had in the
meantime drawn closer in the darkness, bringing with him another slave
*jongen*, by the name of Achilles, being the first prisoner, with whom
the gang then arranged to murder the aforementioned Smuts, to which
murder the first prisoner not only agreed and also added in substance to
it: “Yes! I have long wanted to kill my *baas*, and now he will
die!”,[^9] but also returned ahead to the house in order to put
everything in place which would help to facilitate this murder, seeing
that he not only prevented an old slave *jongen*, by the name of Baatjoe
van Balij, who at the moment when the first prisoner came into the
kitchen wanted to go out to give fodder to his master’s horse, from
doing so, saying to him: “You must not go out, because there are so many
*volk *out there!”, but also immediately put out the lamp burning in the
kitchen, so that, at about eight o’clock, the slave *jongens* Cupido van
Boegies and his comrades, the aforementioned Fortuijn van Boegies and
one Baloc, whom the aforementioned Cupido was holding fast as if being
trussed, who meanwhile had been advancing up to the kitchen door, could
go through the dark kitchen into the *voorhuijs*, where these three
scoundrels not only took, in the most gruesome fashion, the lives of the
aforementioned Smuts, who had been sitting there writing peacefully, as
well as of his wife, who had been sitting next to him on a chair, but
also that of their little son, who had been lying asleep on a chair
close by and who woke up during the abominable murder of his father and
mother and started to scream. Thereafter they called inside from their
gang, who had surrounded the house from the outside during the execution
of these cruel murders, two more \[slaves\] by the names of Julij and
Adonis, plundered the house and stole, apart from three muskets, lead
and powder, from a cabinet: linen, silver spoons, as well as some other
silverware and so on. With all of these goods this whole gang of
murderers – amongst whom was also to be found the second prisoner,
Januarij, who had run away from his aforesaid master about a year ago
now, after only having been here in this country for a short period –
set out, without returning to the mountain, to the dunes at Blaauwberg,
where they kept hidden for some days and maintained themselves with
mussels, which they went to search on the beach, and with some sheep,
which some of these murderers had stolen from Jan Biesjeskraal,[^10]
as also with such food as they went to fetch from some slaves of the
widow Heuning, which slaves had been, since a considerable time
theretofore, providing this gang with food and tobacco, which was
collected by some of them, usually on Fridays, from the bushes in the
vicinity of the Platte Cloof.

That a few days after this, the gang of murderers was discovered there
by a commando of both militia from the honourable Company and burghers,
and when they were, as far as possible, besieged in a large dune or
shrub by this commando, they not only defended themselves against them,
but also shot dead one of the grenadiers, although two of these
scoundrels, named Baloc of the burgher Jochem Daniel Hubenaar and Jamil,
belonging to the widow Dorse, were likewise shot dead by the commando,
while the remaining eleven grasped the opportunity the darkness of night
afforded to escape by fleeing, and proceeded the following night close
to the farm of the widow Heuning, where they spoke to the third prisoner
September who, seeing that he is an old *jongen*, is called “Father” by
the other slaves of the widow Heuning and is considered as such, and who
had gone out on the pretext of going to fetch wood. This September, when
he had returned to his fellow slaves, said in essence to them: “There
are deserters in the veld who must get food”, when the fourth prisoner,
Januarij, according to what he says, then went with two of his fellow
slaves, by the names of Matthij and Jacob, to that place with the food,
and found there three of these deserters, by the names of Fortuijn,
Julij and Adonis, and handed over to them the food that they had
brought, without having seen the other deserters since they kept
themselves hidden somewhere further down. Shortly thereafter, there came
into the slave house on the farm Plattecloof the slave *jongen* Baatjoe
van Boegies, who also formed part of this gang of murderers and had been
shot through his hand during their resistance of the commando, whose
wound was bandaged by the third prisoner, September, after he had first
purified it in the Bugis fashion, and was then put up that night by the
aforementioned September above the baking oven to sleep in the bed of
the slave Jacob.

That of the whole gang there were still alive eleven scoundrels, who
afterwards, when they again got to the other runaways on Table Mountain,
after staying there for two nights, departed from there to the Cape
dunes, where they asked for and received food from certain slave
*jongens* who were busy in a corral gauging wood.[^11] As soon as the
gang had departed, one of these slaves went to the Cape and told of the
route they had taken, which enabled a commando to be sent out again for
these murderers, which reached them in the dunes around the so-called
Swarte Klip[^12] and attacked them, and although they did not hesitate
to violently resist this commando again, seven of them, by the names of
Fortuijn, belonging to the farmer Cornelis Verweij, Patientie of the
burgher Willem Engels, April of the fellow burgher Jan Smid, Cupido of
the aforementioned Smuts, Julij of the soldier Bergman, Adonis of the
widow Rotenburg and Christiaan of the honourable Company, were shot
dead, or otherwise lost their lives, while the remaining four, named
April van Bima of Adam Ceijse, September van Balij of Hendrik Ridder,
Baatjoe of Jan Smid and Januarij of Abraham Craaijwinkel, were taken
prisoner wounded, but since with the first two of these latter ones
there was *periculum in mora*[^13] on account of their heavy wounds,
they received their well-deserved punishment on the spot; while the
corpses of the killed, as also that of Baatjoe van Boegies who suddenly
died of an illness which came over him, were executed as a spectacle to
other malefactors and also considering the situation; so that of this
whole gang of murderers only the second prisoner, Januarij van Boegies,
remained alive.

That the third prisoner, September van Boegies, who was assigned as a
shepherd of his mistress on her aforesaid farm situated at Plattecloof,
and who was the first to have met the aforesaid gang of deserters and
murderers in the veld, not only informed his fellow slaves, by the names
of Januarij van Maccasser, Matthijs van Mallebaar, Adam van Sambouwa,
Jacob van Madagascar, Manus van Mandhaar, Isaac van Boegies and Gedult
van de Caab, or the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and
tenth prisoners, of this, but moreover also ensured, both for a
considerable time and even after the cruel murders of the late
*boekhouder* Michiel Smuts, his wife and child were perpetrated, that
they were provided with food by him and his aforementioned fellow
slaves, as well as two slaves of the burgher Jan le Roex junior, named
Februarij and November, or the eleventh and twelfth prisoners, who had
been requested and persuaded to do so by the third and fourth prisoners,
September and Januarij, which food they stole in all kinds of ways from
their mistress and master, so that the aforesaid could hand it over to
that gang.

That instead of maintaining this gang, the last-named ten prisoners were
far from informing on them to the appropriate place, in accordance with
their duty, in which case they could have been discovered and captured
in time and thus all of the further trouble could have been prevented.
That they not only often allowed some of this aforementioned gang and on
one occasion all of them, every one of which was armed with various
weapons, at night and other unseasonable hours into the slave house on
the farm of the widow Heuning, but in addition to this, when the third
and fourth prisoners, September and Januarij, were informed by two of
this gang that they were of the intention to plunder the garden-plot of
the aforementioned Smuts, De Windmoolen, and the farm of Claas Jonasz in
order to obtain guns, lead and powder; they all agreed – but as regards
most of the aforementioned slaves of the widow Heuning, principally
through the doing and on the suggestion of the said September – in that
slave house with this gang of deserters that as soon as the warm season
comes, or as some of the prisoners say: when the barley would have
ripened, they would all run away with the aforementioned gang of
deserters and murderers on a long journey to the land of the *Caffers*.
Next, the aforementioned September and Januarij likewise suggested this
to the eleventh and twelfth prisoners, Februarij and November of Jan le
Roex, and the said September also the thirteenth prisoner, named Cupido
van Bengalen, belonging to the burgher councillor, *Sieur* Jan
Meijdertsz Cruijwagen, to which the said Cupido – in spite of the fact
that in the year 1738 he was already sentenced by this honourable
Council of Justice for a similar crime and was scourged at the place of
justice here[^14] – as well as the aforementioned prisoners, willingly
agreed, with only the seventh and tenth prisoners trying to excuse
themselves from it by profanely pretending that they were forced to it
by the threats of September and Januarij; so that the twelve last
prisoners were all of the intention to undertake this journey, for which
journey the said September took it upon him to ensure that by that time
there would not only be more slaves of his nation to go along thither,
but also that they would then take along all such gunpowder as might be
found on the farm of his mistress, the widow Heuning. However, the
prisoners do not want to admit that they intended violence in case they
were unable to obtain this \[powder\] secretly, but the third prisoner,
September, did confess that he had asked the cook on the farm of his
mistress, by the name of Slammat, for gunpowder, without however getting
any.

And since he, September, acted as a doctor amongst the slaves of the
Bugis nation in this country, and moreover would provide any slave of
this nation, who had come to him to request this, with letters written
in the Bugis language which would serve to that end \[i.e. of healing\],
it would therefore have been very easy for him, under this pretext, to
incite a good number of his people to increase his gang, and moreover,
through committing all kinds of cruelties later, to have made their way
towards the fulfilment of their mutually planned dangerous and depraved
designs, had it not been discovered in time and fortunately prevented
through proper means, and the prisoners got into the hands of justice.

All of which are atrocious deeds through which the general peace of
these lands are greatly disturbed, and the good inhabitants are put in a
state of fear and anxiety, consequently it cannot be left unpunished,
but should, on the contrary, be punished most rigorously as an example
and deterrent to other scoundrels and malefactors.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice of this government,
serving today, having seen and read with attention the written
*crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie*, drawn up and delivered for and
against the prisoners by the honourable independent fiscal, Pieter Reede
van Oudshoorn, in his official capacity, further having noted everything
that served the case and could have moved their honours, practising
justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty States General
of the United Netherlands, having judged all the prisoners, is
sentencing them with this: to be taken to the place where criminal
sentences are usually executed here, and there to be handed over to the
executioner, the first prisoner, Achilles van de West Cust, to be tied
to a cross and to be pinched with red-hot pincers on eight different
places, then to be broken alive from the bottom up without the *coup de
grâce*; further the second, third and fourth prisoners, each also to be
tied onto a cross, the second and third prisoners, Januarij and
September van Boegies, to be broken alive from the bottom up without,
and the fourth prisoner, Januarij van Macasser, with the *coup de
grâce*, as well as to remain lying on these crosses until they have
given up the ghost; further the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth,
tenth, eleventh and twelfth prisoners, Isaac van Boegies, Adam van
Sambouwa, Manus van Mandhaar, Matthijs van Mallebaar, Jacob van
Madagascar, Gedult van de Caab, Februarij van Boegies and November van
Boegies, to be punished with the rope on the gallows in such a fashion
that death will follow; thereafter the dead bodies of all the prisoners
to be dragged to the outer place of execution, those of the first four
prisoners to be put up on the wheels, and the bodies of the eight other
prisoners again to be hanged on the gallows, to remain thus as prey for
the air and birds of heaven.

Further, the thirteenth prisoner, Cupido van Bengalen, to stand exposed
under the gallows with the rope around his neck, and then to be severely
scourged with rods on his bare back, as also thereupon to be branded and
thereafter to be riveted in chains for a period of ten consecutive years
and sent back home to his owner; with sentencing all of the prisoners to
the costs and expenditure of justice; the Council denying the otherwise
drawn up *eijsch* of the honourable Officer as regards the last
prisoner.

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 4 September 1760,
as also pronounced and executed on the 6^th^ thereupon.[^15]

Let the execution be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

\[signed\] J. Meinertzhagen, R.S. Allemann, Cl. Brand, D. d’Aillij, Jn.
Fr. Tiemmendorf, Pieter Coningh, P. Hacker, H.L. Bletterman, Jn.
Haszingh, J.M. Cruijwagen.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Interrogation drawn up, and given to the honourable deputised members
from the honourable Council of Justice of this government so that the
slave September can be heard and interrogated, on the requisition of the
independent fiscal, Pieter Reede van Oudshoorn, while his given
responses must be made known in the margins of this.

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, September van Boegies, who has
answered to the questions below as noted to their sides.

Article 1: What is the prisoner’s name, age and place of birth?

Answer: September van Boegies, fifty years old at a guess.

Article 2: Whose bondsman the prisoner is?

Answer: Of the widow Adriaan Heuning.

Article 3: How long a time it is since the prisoner was first informed
of that gang of deserters, and where it was that he had first spoken to
them?

Answer: It was after the ploughing season that I first spoke to them at
the Platte Cloof.

Article 4: How strong this group was when he spoke to them for the first
time?

Answer: Three.

Article 5: To whom these runaway slaves belong, and how they are named?

Answer: One of Bergman, one of Verweij, and Adonis.

Article 6: If there was present amongst these runaway slaves a slave
*jongen* named Fortuijn, who, about a full year ago now, had wounded his
owner Cornelis Verweij with a knife?

Answer: Yes.

Article 7: If this said Fortuijn is the prisoner’s brother or
half-brother?

Answer: No.

Article 8: If not, why did they then always address each other in this
way?

Answer: Because it is the custom amongst the Bugis.

Article 9: How strong this gang of runaway slaves was in fact?

Answer: Thirteen men.

Article 10: For how long a period the prisoner had provided these
runaway slaves with food and tobacco?

Answer: Two weeks, over and above what they had obtained from the other
slaves.

Article 11: If these slaves, while they were staying in the dunes at
Blaauwberg, once came to fetch food from the prisoner and his comrades
at the Platte Cloof?

Answer: Yes.

Article 12: How often were these deserters with him in the slave house?

Answer: Two times.

Article 13: If there were once six and on another occasion thirteen of
these deserters with him in the slave house?

Answer: Yes.

Article 14: How the six deserters are named who were with the prisoner
in the slave house on the first occasion, and whose bondsmen they were,
to name these.

Answer: Julij, Fortuijn, Adonis, the other three I do not know.

Article 15: How that *jongen* is named who sat on the prisoner’s or
Isaak’s bed and wrote?

Answer: Julij.

Article 16: If it had been Julij of Bergman?

Answer: As above.

Article 17: If the *jongen* of Cornelis Verweij, named Fortuijn, had
also been present at this?

Answer: Yes.

Article 18: If the prisoner told the aforementioned Julij what he had to
write?

Answer: Fortuijn told it to me.

Article 19: If the prisoner also gave a letter to Adonis?

Answer: Not to Adonis, but Julij had given a letter to Januarij.

Article 20: What was written in that letter?

Answer: Nothing other than that he could protect his body from evil by
it.

Article 21: What agreement did they reach with one another at this time?

Answer: The deserters bade me to run away too, though I did not wish to
do so.

Article 22: With what were the said slaves armed at this time?

Answer: They did not bring any guns along.

Article 23: If, about fourteen days thereafter, thirteen to fourteen
deserters were brought into the slave house by the prisoner, amongst
whom were also those six deserters who had been in the slave house
fourteen days before?

Answer: Yes, thirteen.

Article 24: Who had blown out the candle in the slave house on this
occasion?

Answer: The candle remained burning.

Article 25: If this had been performed by Januarij?

Answer: As above.

Article 26: If the prisoner, while the deserters were in his sleeping
place, where he had a candle, handed over a letter to Julij?

Answer: No! Julij read his own letter.

Article 27: With what were they armed at this time?

Answer: They had knives at their sides, and nothing else.

Article 28: If they were armed with a pistol, four to five
*assegaaijen*, as also each one with a *parrang* or so-called *kris* in
his waistband?

Answer: As on the aforegoing article.

Article 29: What kind of mutual agreement did they reach amongst
themselves at this time?

Answer: They said to me: Come along.

Article 30: If this was not principally to gear up to go with one
another to the land of the *Caffers*?

Answer: Yes.

Article 31: At what time did they intend to undertake this journey?

Answer: When the barley would be ripe.

Article 32: If this was planned by them to be at the time when the
barley would form into ears?

Answer: Yes.

Article 33: Whom of their gang it would have been, to name these.

Answer: Jacob, Manus, Isaac, Adam, Februarij and November, both of Jan
le Roux; though I, the interrogatee, did not wish to go with, and about
Matthijs and Gedult I do not know.

Article 34: If those who agreed with this were: the aforementioned
runaway slaves, the interrogatee, as also his fellow slaves: Januarij,
Jacob, Isaac, Manu, Matthijs and Gedult, and further two slaves of the
burgher Jan le Roux, named Februarij and November?

Answer: As on the aforegoing article.

Article 35: Who else, in addition, would have gone with them on this
journey, to name these.

Answer: Nobody else.

Article 36: If the slave *jongen* by the name of Cupido, belonging to
*Sieur *Cruijwagen, would also have gone with?

Answer: This *jongen* spoke to me and said that if I go along, he too
would go, that he could speak Hottentots and knew the way to the land of
the *Caffers*.

Article 37: If the prisoner, in order to search for more of his Bugis
people, would have gone to the Cape on the 27^th^ of the past month
July?

Answer: No.

Article 38: If an agreement was reached by the prisoner and one of the
captains of the gang of deserters to obtain guns and to plunder the farm
of Smuts, De Windmoolen, and that of Claas Jonas?

Answer: No.

Article 39: If the prisoner asked the cook Slamat \[*sic*\] for
gunpowder?

Answer: No.

Article 40: What did this cook give as an answer to the prisoner about
this?

Answer: As above.

Article 41: If the prisoner was of the intention, with the help of his
accomplices, to get into their possession the gunpowder which was stored
there; to murder the *knecht* of his mistress, the widow Heuning;
thereafter to plunder the farm and to take the guns which were there
with them?

Answer: No.

Article 42: With whom it was that the prisoner was in principal contact
here at the Cape?

Answer: With one *maaij* Sila,[^16] a Chinese woman, who lives across
the residence of the butcher Bergman, for whom I always brought onions.

Article 43: If it was with a Chinese woman named *maaij* Siele
\[*sic*\], who had sent for him via Isaac?

Answer: Yes.

Article 44: If, on the very evening that this gang of murderers had
escaped the commando – after food was first taken, on his orders, by
Januarij, Jacob and Matthijs to these deserters, namely Fortuijn, Julij
and Adonis – one of these rascals, by the name of Baatjoe, belonging to
the burgher Smit, and who was wounded in his arm, came to him in the
slave house?

Answer: Yes.

Article 45: If the prisoner, since being a doctor, bandaged the said
Baatjoe and then designated as sleeping place for him that night the bed
of Jacob?

Answer: I spat on the wounds in the Bugis fashion, but I took off the
cloth and thereafter bandaged it again with the piece of cloth of
Baatjoe.

Article 46: If his fellow slave Januarij is an adopted son of the
prisoner?  
Answer: Yes.

Article 47: If the prisoner gave Januarij a silver soup spoon, of which
the handle was broken off, to take care of?

Answer: The deserter Christiaan had given it to me, and Januarij asked
me for it.

Article 48: If the prisoner handed over a letter to his said adopted
son, saying: “Julij sends you this”?

Answer: Yes.

Article 49: What the contents of that letter was?

Answer: That the letter was good against illness.

Article 50: If the letter currently being shown to him, which is written
in the Bugis language, belongs to him?

Answer: Yes.

Article 51: If not, through what coincidence did this letter end up in
his chest?

Answer: As above.

Article 52: If the address comprises: “From the *volk* to September at
the Platte Cloof”?

Answer: I cannot read.

Article 53: If the prisoner can read or write Bugis?

Answer: No, but if I am given an example, I can copy it out.

Article 54: From whom was this letter sent to him?

Answer: From a *jongen* at Stellenbosch, named Oepas, though who brought
it to me I do not know.

Article 55: What do the contents of this letter consist of?

Answer: That because the slave Oepas was continually ill, he requested
me to come to him.

Article 56: What reasons did the prisoner have to claim, when the
honourable petitioner interrogated him about this gang for the first
time, that it was only nine men strong and that seven of them were
heavily wounded?

Answer: I heard that from Christiaan.

Article 57: If this was not to mislead the honourable petitioner by it?

Answer: No.

Article 58: If the prisoner would have acted as the head of his gang?

Answer: Yes, I was requested to do that by my house *volk*,[^17] being
the slaves named on article 33.

Article 59: What reasons did the prisoner have to embark upon such
pernicious designs?

Answer: I did not want to run away.

Article 60: If the prisoner should not admit now that, because of the
conspiracy with and the giving of food to a gang of thirteen to fourteen
murderers, the enticement of his fellow slaves, as also their mutually
intended pernicious designs: to run away to the land of the *Caffers*,
to plunder some farms, to steal guns and powder and to murder everybody
who might try to prevent them on their way, he is severely punishable?

Answer: Over the conspiracy with the gang of murderers and the giving of
food, I admit to be punishable, but as to the enticement of my fellow
slaves I have no guilt, and because I knew it was wrong, I did not wish
to go along to the land of the *Caffers*; however, of the plundering of
farms and the murdering of people I know nothing, but I did hear from
the other slaves that they wanted to take gunpowder from their farm, but
I did not agree to this.

Thus interrogated and answered in the Bugis language by Pieter Matthijs
Pieterssoon in the Castle of Good Hope on 9 August 1760, before the
honourables P. Hacker and Jn. Haszingh, members of the honourable
Council of Justice, aforementioned, who have properly signed this,
together with the interrogatee, as also the aforementioned interpreter
P.M. Pietersoon and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave September van Boegies,
who, after this, his aforegoing interrogation, with the responses he had
given to it, had been read out word by word, clearly and plainly,
declares to fully persist by it, not desiring that anything more be
added to or taken from it, except only: that he intended to run away as
well; that he had asked gunpowder from the cook, without, however,
having threatened him; that Baatjoe of Smid had slept on the oven; that
the confessant admits to be guilty of enticing of his fellow slaves and,
finally, that the plundering of farms and the murdering of people had
not been decided upon definitely, and declares all of the above to be
the truth .[^18]

Thus verified in the Malay language and interpreted as before, in the
Castle of Good Hope on 12 August 1760.

This X is the mark of September van Boegies.

For the interpretation, \[signed\] P.M. Pietersoon.

As delegates, \[signed\] P. Hacker, Jn. Haszingh.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

[^1]: * The documentation for the case includes the *eijsch*, the
    testimonies of each of the accused (including Baatjoe van Bougies,
    who died in prison before judgment was given) as well as those of
    Fortuijn van Bengal and Baatjoe van Balij, Michiel Smuts’s surviving
    slaves, CJ 373, ff. 43-143.*

[^2]: * Cairns 1980b: 15. For historical analysis of different aspects
    of the whole episode, see Ross 1983: 19-20 and Koolhof & Ross 2002.
    The murder led to an immediate banning of slave wood-collecting on
    the mountain, the enforcement of controls over slaves gathering in
    Cape Town streets at night without lanterns, and the requirement
    that they carry letters from their owners showing that they had
    permission to be out of their owner’s sight (*Kaapse Plakkaatboek
    *III: 30-1). The ban on wood-collecting was rescinded on 7 August
    (*Kaapse Plakkaatboek *III: 31-2), but slaves were ordered to report
    sightings of any runaways on the mountain. The fear of a
    Bougies-inspired uprising in this and subsequent cases involving
    East Indian slave resistance confirmed the stereotype of Bugis
    slaves as ‘treacherous’, and contributed to the (ineffectual)
    banning of the further importation of East Indian slaves to the Cape
    in 1767. *Plakkaten* to enforce this had to be periodically issued,
    *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* III: 164 (1784) and IV: 80-1 (1792); see
    discussion for causes of this ban in Worden 1985: 44 and Shell 1994:
    43 n. 8 and 233. *

[^3]: * Michiel Smuts was a Company official with the rank of
    *boekhouder* who lived with his family in a house on the slopes of
    the mountain. Stories of the family murder continued to be told
    until well into the twentieth century, Cairns 1980b. *

[^4]: * CJ 373, bound between ff. 141 and 142. It is translated (rather
    inaccurately according to Koolhof & Ross 2002) into Malay and Dutch,
    CJ 373, f. 142. The letter, along with the Dutch and Malay
    translations, is printed in Franken 1953: 67-9. For another Bougies
    letter in the criminal records, see 1786 Augustus van de Caab et
    al.*

[^5]: * It was a request for medical assistance. It was not even clear
    to the court whether September could read and write, and he himself
    claimed he could not. Koolhof & Ross (2002) point out that the
    meaning and interpretation of the letter were misinterpreted both by
    the court and by later historians. The possession of a Bougies
    letter was also viewed with suspicion and alarm in 1786 Augustus van
    de Caab et al. *

[^6]:  *Sic*. This should read something like: ‘op haar voorseijde
    plaats, aan de Plattecloof geleegen, bescheijden’.

[^7]:  *Sic*. A verb such as *waren* is omitted here.

[^8]:  An alternative name for Devil’s Peak, much used in the eighteenth
    century.

[^9]:  In his interrogation, Achilles revealed that he had run away from
    Smuts after being beaten for failing to sell his owner’s vegetables,
    CJ 373, f. 75, article 7.

[^10]:  See 1751 Januarij van Boegies, n. 7.

[^11]:  i.e. chopping or working it into lengths of a *roede*.

[^12]:  In present-day Mitchell’s Plain.

[^13]:  This is a technical legal phrase meaning ‘there is danger in
    delay’ or, more succinctly, ‘delaying is dangerous’. The summary
    execution of some of the wounded slaves by the commando was
    doubtless in revenge for the Smuts family murders.

[^14]:  The *sententie* for this case is preserved in CJ 786, document
    30.

[^15]:  These sentences were recorded in the *regtsrollen,* CJ 42, ff.
    81-7. After the *eijsch* was read out to them, some of the accused
    stated that they did not deserve the death sentence. Januarij van
    Boegies stated that he had escaped and had been with the ‘complot
    moordernaaren’ (gang of murderers) but that he had committed no
    murder himself, while Gedult van de Caab stated that he had been
    forced to commit murder by Januarij van Maccasser and that he had
    wanted to warn his mistress, but out of fear had not dared to say
    anything, a claim which Januarij earnestly denied, CJ 42, ff. 81-2.

[^16]:  On the use of the respectful term *maaij*, see 1755 Patientie
    van Manacabo, n. 7.

[^17]:  Meaning the other slaves attached to that house or farm, an
    interesting insight into the ways in which a slave identified with
    the other slaves of his owner’s household.

[^18]:  It is not clear why September van Boegies here retracted
    everything that he so vigorously denied during the interrogation. It
    may have been because of the other slaves’ testimonies, or possibly
    the threat of torture, although the records are not usually silent
    on the latter.
