1.  CAREL BOOM

*This record of an emergency Sunday meeting of the Council of Justice
tells the suicide of Carel Boom,[^1] the ‘portier’ at the
Company’s Slave Lodge in Cape Town. It gives a brief insight into this
key building for slaves. The Lodge housed the slaves owned by the
Company itself, as well as the convict *bandieten* (about 580 altogether
in the mid-1760s), except for those who worked on the outposts away from
the town.[^2] Boom had formed a relationship with the slave
Cornelia van Piloane.[^3] When she wanted to break it, Boom tried
to force her and wounded her in the process, displaying a jealousy shown
in other cases by male slaves towards their female partners.*

**CJ 48** Crimineele Regtsrolle des Casteels de Goede Hoop, 1766, ff.
54-6.

Sondag, den 30^e^ Maart 1766:

Ter ordre van den edelachtbaare heere Praesident, en op voordragt van
den heer Independent Fiscaal Jan Willem Cloppenburg, in rondvrage
gebragt sijnde, of het, ten spiegel en afschrik van andere Godvergeetene
fielten, niet goed sijn soude dat het lighaam van den, hem gisteren in
de voornagt door een pistool schoot deerlijk om ’t leeven gebragt
hebbenden, portier der edele Compagnies slaven logie, in naame Carel
Boom, door den scherpregter onder de galg begraven wierd; dewijl dien
selfsmoordenaar, eerst momentelijk voordat sigselfs had vermoord, naar
eene slavin der edele Compagnies, in naame Cornelia van Piloane, met
eene andere pistool geschooten en aan ’t hoofd geraakt had; dat, volgens
het door de opperchirurgijns gedaane rapport, de daardoor veroorsaakte
wonden wel doodelijk werden konden, en uijt de omstandigheeden bleek,
dat het voorneemen van gemelde Carel Boom geweest was om die slavin ’t
leeven daardoor te beneemen, overmits deselve, naar een tijd lang bij
hem gehouden te hebben, daarvan afgesien had; hebbende hij voorseijde
Cornelia van Piloane dierhalven op laatstleeden Maandag, ten eijnde haar
te dwingen tot langere bijhoudinge, bij derselver onwilligheijd,
gramstoorig met een mes in de hand gequetst, ’tgeen die slavin egter
toenmaals, om denselven te verschoonen, opgegeeven had, geschied te zijn
door het snijden van kaas.

Welke motiven door de praesente leeden in aanmerkinge genoomen sijnde,
is door haar edeles, dewijl diergelijken wreed en boosaardig schepsel
geene eerlijke begraffenis meriteerd, het gedaane voorstel van den heer
Independent Fiscaal geamplecteerd en toegestaan geworden.

Cabo de Goede Hoop, *datum ut supra*.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Sunday, 30 March 1766.

By order of the honourable president and on the proposition of the
honourable independent fiscal, Jan Willem Cloppenburg, which has been
circulated \[amongst the members of the Council of Justice\], viz. if it
would not be a good thing, as an example and deterrent to other
God-forsaken scoundrels, that the body of the porter of the honourable
Company’s slave lodge, by the name of Carel Boom, who took his own life
miserably with a pistol shot early during the night yesterday, be buried
under the gallows by the executioner;[^4] since this self-murderer had
at first, a moment before killing himself, shot a woman slave of the
honourable Company, by the name of Cornelia van Piloane, with a
different pistol and wounded her on the head; which wound, according to
the report made by the chief surgeon, may well become fatal, and also
since it appears from the circumstances that it was the intention of the
said Carel Boom to take the life of that woman slave in this way, since
she, after having had a relationship with him for a long time, had ended
it. Consequently, on last Monday, in order to force her to continue
their relationship for longer, he wrathfully wounded the aforesaid
Cornelia with a knife on her hand; which she at that time, in order to
exculpate him, claimed to have happened when she was cutting
cheese.[^5]

The members present, having taken these motives into account, and since
such a cruel and evil-minded creature does not merit an honourable
burial, accept and allow the proposition made by the honourable
independent fiscal.

Cape of Good Hope, the date as above.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

[^1]: * Carel Boom van Koningsburg arrived at the Cape in 1749 as a
    soldier and was employed as *portier* of the Slave Lodge (the
    gatekeeper, whose job it was to remove the key each night as a
    precaution against arson attempts by the inmates, Shell 1994:
    177-78). He left behind 158 guilders, but no will, VOC 13988, f.
    163.*

[^2]: * On the Slave Lodge, see* *Geyser 1958: 6-41; Shell 1994:
    172-205; Vollgraaff 1997; and Schoeman 2001: 542-72.*

[^3]: * There is no record of Cornelia van Piloane in the death
    registers of Company slaves, as recorded in the *Attestatiën *of the
    Council of Policy (Duvenage et al. 2000). *

[^4]:  This was a particularly dishonourable end for Boom since
    association with the executioner was considered highly polluting,
    and burial below the gallows a fate for criminals (see 1719 Jonas
    van Manado, n. 13). It is not clear whether this was because he had
    committed suicide or because of his attack on one of the Company’s
    slaves. The description of Boom as a ‘wreed en boosaardig schepsel’
    (cruel and malicious creature) suggests both. Upham 2001b argues
    that suicides by Europeans were not punished judicially, yet this
    particular case was considered important enough for an emergency
    meeting of the Council to be held on a Sunday.

[^5]:  The slaves in the Lodge got weekly rations which they cooked
    themselves (Geyser 1958: 24 and Schoeman 2001: 531-32).
