1.  FRANS VAN MADAGASCAR

*This dispute took place at Elsenburg, the large wine farm owned by
Marten Melk, one of the richest burghers in the colony.[^1] Melk
employed his slave Willem as a *mandoor*,[^2] a slave who was
placed in charge of the other slaves and had the authority to punish
them. Willem beat Frans when he found him drunk and ordered him back to
work. Frans later took his revenge by killing Willem with a *kirrij*
blow. Frans then ran away, but was caught several days later in the
Swellendam district. *

*The case is interesting for the details it gives of the slave living
quarters on Melk’s farm, with separate sections for the male and female
slaves.[^3] Willem, in the privileged position of *mandoor*, slept
in the women’s quarters.*

**CJ 792** Sententiën, 1768-1771, ff. 36-42.

Nademaal uijt de libere confessie van Frans van Madagascar, slaaf van
den heemraad Marten Melk, oud naar gissing 23 jaaren, thans ’s heeren
gevangen, en de verdere, ten processe gevoegde, stucken, alle behoorlijk
gerecolleerd, den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie evident gebleeken is:

Dat den gevangen, dewelke ter sijner lijfheer woonplaatste onder het
opsigt van den, over hem gestelden, mandoor, den meede slaaf Willem, als
kelderjongen dienst gedaan heeft, nu wel drie maanden voorleeden op een
morgen, de klokke over agt uuren, door te veel genuttigden wijn
beschonken geraakt, en oversulx stilletjes uijt het wijnpakhuijs naar
het bosch gegaan sijnde, sig aldaar om te slaapen needer gelegt had.

Dat voorseijde Willem den gevangen naar ’t middag eeten in het bosch
slaapende gevonden, wacker gemaakt en, onder het seggen: Wat sijt gij
dronken!, met een stok geslaagen hebbende, hij gevangen sig van daar
naar het wijnpakhuijs en uijt hetselve met een mandje naar den
wijngaard, mitsgaders met de verdere slaven aan het druijven snijden,
begeeven had.

Dat wanneer voormelde Willem sig dien eijgensten avond in de slavinnen
kamer, alwaar desselfs gewoone slaapplaats is, bevonden had, den
gevangen, die toenmaals ten eenemaal nugteren geweest was, voorsien met
een, onder sijn camisool verborgen, houdenden kirrij, niet alleen wel
een halfuur voor de deur dier kamer heen en weer gewandelt, maar sig
vervolgens ook tusschen de deuren van het slaven- en slavinnenhuijs,
needer geset, en desselfs oogen gestadig op de deur der slavinnenkamer
gevestigt gehouden had; sulx ’tselve den slaven jongen Parfors, aan
denwelken het, tusschen den gevangen en voorseijde Willem, in het bos
voorgevallene, bekent was, had doen vooronderstellen, dat den gevangen
op meergemelde Willem paste, met voorneemen om dien jongen met den
kirrij te slaan; al waaromme gemelde Parfors tot sijn meede slaaf
Achilles gesegt had, dat naar de meijdenkamer gaan en voorseijde Willem
daarvan kennis geeven mogte; denwelken sulx gedaan, en voormelde Willem
sig daarop buijten de deur bij den gevangen begeeven hebbende, aan den
gevangen gevraagt had: Frans, wilt gij mij slaan? Op hetwelke door den
gevangen g’antwoord sijnde: Wie segt dat?, had gemelde Willem hervat: Ik
weet dat gij mij slaan wilt! En sig teffens omgekeerd, eeven alsof
weeder in voorseijde vertrek gaan wilde, als wanneer den gevangen
meergemelde Willem met den kirrij een slag aan ’t hooft toegebragt, en
daar door een wonde veroorsaakt had, dewelke tot op het slaap been en
door de drie tabula heen gedrongen sijnde, meergemelde Willem oversulx
plotselings ter aarden gevallen, en kort daarop overleeden was; sijnde
den gevangen, dewelke sig intusschen op de vlugt begeeven had, naar
eenige dagen rondswervens in ’t district Swellendam gevangen genoomen,
van daar herwaards getransporteerd, en dus in hande van justitie
geraakt.

Maar nademaal sulke geperpetreerde manslag, in een land daar men regt en
geregtigheijd naar behooren handhaaft, geensints ongestraft kan gelaaten
worden, maar, ten spiegel en afschrik van anderen, voorbeeldelijk moet
werden gestraft.

Soo is het, dat den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, voormeld, ten daage
dienende, met nadruk geleesen en overwoogen hebbende den schriftelijken
crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie door den landdrost van Stellenbosch en
Drakensteijn, meester Jacobus Johannes le Suëur, *ratione officii*, op
ende jeegens den gevangen gedaan ende genoomen, voorts geleth op
desselfs vrijwillige gerecolleerde confessie, mitsgaders op alle
hetgeene ter saake dienende was en haar edelagtbaarens eenigsints konde
doen moveeren, regt doende uijt naame ende van weegens de hoogmoogende
Heeren Staaten Generaal der Vereenigde Neederlanden, den gevangen Frans
van Madagascar hebben gecondemneert, gelijk haar edelagtbaarens
denselven condemneeren mits deesen: omme gebragt te werden ter plaatse
alwaar men alhier gewoon is crimineele sententiën te executeeren, aldaar
aan den scherpregter overgeleevert sijnde, met de koorde aan de galg
soodanig gestraft te worden dat er de dood naar volg; voorts desselfs
doode lighaam naar het buijten geregt gesleept, en aldaar weeder aan de
galg opgehangen sijnde, dus te verblijven, totdat door de lugt en de
voogelen des heemels sal sijn verteerd; met condemnatie in de kosten en
misen van Justitie.

Aldus gedaan en gesententieert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 30^e^
Junij 1768, mitsgaders gepronuntieert ende g’executeert den 2^e^ der
daaraanvolgende maand Julij.

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] R. Tulbagh.

\[get.\] J.W. Cloppenburg, Jm. v. Plettenberg, P. Hacker, O.M. Bergh, D.
Westerhoff, Otto Ludij Hemmij, L.C. Warneck, T.C. Rönnekamp, Js. Hs.
Blanckenberg, P.L. le Suëur, J.F.W. Böttiger, Johs. van Sittert.

Mij present, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

**CJ 394** Criminele Process Stukken, 1768, ff. 516-17v.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den slaaf Frans van
Madagascar, toebehoorende den oud heemraad, monsieur Marten Melk, oud
naar gissing drie en twintig jaaren, denwelken, ter requisitie van den
landdrost tot Stellenbosch en Drakensteijn, meester Jacobus Johannes le
Suëur, confesseerde hoe waar is:

Dat den confessant, ter sijner lijfheers plaatse in den kelder als
kelderjongen gewerkt hebbende, den, over hem als mandoor gestelden,
meede slaaf Willem, hem confessant nu ruijm twee maanden voorleeden, op
een seekeren morgen over agt uuren, drie glasen wijn te drinken gegeeven
had, waarna den confessant met drinken hebbende willen uijtscheijden,
voorseijde Willem hem confessant, onder het geeven van meerderen wijn,
had toegevoegt: Toe, drink maar!, invoegen den confessant nog meer
gedronken had, en daardoor dronken geraakt sijnde, sig vervolgens uijt
den kelder weg en naar ’t bosch had begeeven, alwaar sig tot slaapen
needergelegt had.

Dat voorseijde Willem naar ’t middageeten hem confessant in ’t bosch
sijnde koomen soeken, den confessant wacker gemaakt en, onder ’t seggen:
Wat ben gij dronken?, met een stok geslagen had, waarna den confessant
sig naar ’t wijnpakhuijs had begeeven, sijn mandje gehaald, mitsgaders
daarmeede gegaan was naar den wijngaard om druijven te snijden, ’tgeen
hij confessant ook gedaan heeft.

Dat wanneer den confessant dien eijgensten avond, in den donkeren met de
slaven meijden in naame Silvia en Mars[^4] voor ’t slavinnenhuijs had
geseeten, voorseijde Willem, sonder te weeten waarom denselven sulx
gedaan had, was gekomen en hem confessant, die als half slapende
geseeten had, een slag met de hand om de ooren had toegebragt, sulx den
confessant opstaande, een agter de deur van ’t slavenhuijs staanden
kirrij gehaald, en voorseijde Willem daarmeede een slag aan ’t hoofd
toegebragt had, sonder te weeten waar dien jongen daardoor geraakt
heeft, hebbende hij confessant die toenmaals nog wat beschonken geweest
was, geen voorneemen gehad om dien jongen dood te slaan, en hem, volgens
sijne gedagten, ook soo een force slag niet had gegeeven.

Dat den confessant voorseijde Willem ter aarden hebbende sien vallen,
sijn kirrij weggeworpen, en sig aan drossen begeeven had, sijnde dien
nagt elders in de bosjes verbleeven; en ’s volgenden daags naar over ’t
gebergte gegaan weesende, was den confessant, naar vijf dagen
omswervens, door eenige Hottentotten gevangen genoomen en naar
Swellendam in den tronk gebragt geworden.

Dat aldus is geconfesseerd in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 10^e^ Junij
1768, voor d’ edele Tobias Christiaan Rönnekamp en Jan Frederik Willem
Böttiger, leeden uijt den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, voormeld, die
de minuten deeses, beneevens den confessant ende mij, secretaris, meede
behoorlijk hebben gesubscribeert.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

Recollement

Compareerde voor ons, ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, voormeld, Frans van
Madagascar, denwelken deese, sijne gegeevene confessie, van woorde tot
woorde, klaar en duijdelijk, voorgeleesen sijnde, verklaarde daarbij te
persisteeren, niet begeerende dat er iets meer bijgevoegt ofte van
gedaan werden sal, betuijgend alle ’t voorenstaande de waarheijd te
sijn.

Aldus gerecolleerd in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 11^e^ Junij 1768.

Dit X is ’t handmerk van Frans.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] T.C. Rönnekamp, Johs. van Sittert.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Since, from the willing confession of Frans van Madagascar, slave of the
*heemraad* Marten Melk, 23 years old at a guess, currently their
honours’ prisoner, and from the other documents produced in the case, it
has appeared evident to the Council of Justice:

That just after eight o’clock one morning, fully three months ago now,
the prisoner, who was serving on his owner’s home farm as a cellar
*jongen* under the supervision of the *mandoor* placed over him, his
fellow slave Willem, got drunk because of consuming too much wine and
therefore quietly went from the wine store to the bushes where he lay
down to sleep.

That after lunch the aforesaid Willem found the prisoner asleep in the
bushes, roused him and, while saying: “How drunk you are!”, beat him
with a stick. The prisoner then went from there to the wine store and
proceeded thence with a basket to the vineyard in order to cut grapes
with the other slaves.

That that very same evening, when the aforementioned Willem was in the
room of the women slaves, which is where his customary sleeping place
is, the prisoner, who was then entirely sober and armed with a *kirrij*,
which he held hidden under his waistcoat, not only, for fully half an
hour, walked up and down in front of the door of this room, but
afterwards also sat down between the doors of the men’s and women’s
rooms and kept his eyes steadily fixed on the door of the women slaves’
room. This caused the slave *jongen* Parfors, who knew of what had
happened between the prisoner and the aforesaid Willem in the bushes, to
presume that the prisoner was watching for the aforementioned Willem
with the intention to hit him with the *kirrij*. For which reason the
said Parfors told his fellow slave Achilles to go to the women slaves’
room and to inform the aforesaid Willem of this, who indeed did so; when
the aforementioned Willem came out of the room to the prisoner and asked
him: “Frans, do you want to hit me?”, to which he was answered by the
prisoner: “Who says that?” The said Willem then continued: “I know that
you want to hit me!” and at the same time turned around, just as if he
wanted to return again to the aforementioned room, which is when the
prisoner dealt the aforementioned Willem a blow on his head with the
*kirrij* and with that caused a wound which penetrated through the three
tables[^5] to the temporal bone, as a result of which the
aforementioned Willem suddenly fell down to the earth and shortly
thereupon died. The prisoner, who meanwhile had set out in flight, was
taken prisoner in the Swellendam district after roaming around for some
days, and was transported from there to here and thus came into the
hands of justice.

But since the perpetration of this manslaughter can under no
circumstances be left unpunished in a country where people properly
uphold law and justice, but ought to be punished in an exemplary fashion
as an example and deterrent to others.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned,
serving today, having read and considered with attention the written
*crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and
against the prisoner by the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Drakenstein,
*Meester* Jacobus Johannes le Suëur, by reason of his office; further,
having noted the same’s voluntarily verified confession, as well as
everything else which served the case and could possibly have moved
their honours, practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high
and mighty Lords States General of the United Netherlands, having judged
the prisoner Frans van Madagascar, is sentencing him with this: to be
taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually executed here,
and, having been handed over to the executioner, to be punished with the
rope on the gallows in such a way that death will follow, further the
same’s dead body be dragged to the outside place of execution and there
once again to be hanged on the gallows, to remain thus until being
consumed by the air and the birds of heaven, with sentencing to the
costs and expenditure of justice.[^6]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 30 June 1768, as
also pronounced and executed on the 2^nd^ of the thereupon following
month July.

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] R. Tulbagh.

\[signed\] J.W. Cloppenburg, Jm. v. Plettenberg, P. Hacker, O.M. Bergh,
D. Westerhoff, Otto Ludij Hemmij, L.C. Warneck, T.C. Rönnekamp, Js. Hs.
Blanckenberg, P.L. le Suëur, J.F.W. Böttiger, Johs. van Sittert.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave Frans van Madagascar,
belonging to the former *heemraad*, *Monsieur* Marten Melk, 23 years old
at a guess, who, on the requisition of the landdrost of Stellenbosch and
Drakenstein, *Meester* Jacobus Johannes le Suëur, confesses it to be
true:  

That fully two months ago now, on a certain morning after 8 o’clock, the
confessant, working on his owner’s farm in the cellar as a cellar
*jongen*, was given three glasses of wine to drink by his fellow slave,
Willem, placed over him as *mandoor*, after which the confessant wanted
to stop drinking, to which the aforesaid Willem, while giving him more
wine, said: “Don’t worry, drink!”, so that the confessant drank even
more and became drunk as a result, which is when he left the cellar and
went into the bushes where he lay himself down to sleep.

That after lunch, the aforesaid Willem came to look for the confessant
in the bushes, roused him and, while saying: “How drunk you are!”, beat
him with a stick, after which the confessant went to the wine store,
took his basket and went with it to the vineyard in order to cut grapes,
which he also did.

That that very same evening, when the confessant was sitting in front of
the women slaves’ house with the slave *meijden* named Silvia and
Mars,[^7] the aforesaid Willem, without knowing why he did this, came
and dealt the confessant, who was sitting there half asleep, a blow with
the hand on his ears. Which is when the confessant got up and took a
*kirrij*, which was standing behind the door of the slave house, and
gave the aforesaid Willem a blow with it to his head, without knowing
where this *jongen* was hit. The confessant, who was then still somewhat
inebriated, did not then have any intention to beat this *jongen* to
death, and also did not, to his mind, give him such a heavy blow.

That when the confessant saw the aforesaid Willem falling down to the
ground, he threw away his *kirrij* and ran away, staying that night
somewhere in the bushes and, after crossing the mountains the following
day, was taken prisoner, after having roamed around for five days, by
some Hottentots and taken to the prison in Swellendam.

Thus confessed in the Castle of Good Hope on 10 June 1768 before the
honourables Tobias Christiaan Rönnekamp and Jan Frederik Willem
Böttiger, members of the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned,
who have properly signed the original of this, together with the
confessant and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

Verification

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the aforementioned Frans van
Madagascar, who, after this, his given confession, was read out word by
word, clearly and plainly, declares to persist by it, not desiring that
anything more should be added to or taken from it, declaring all of the
above to be the truth.

Thus verified in the Castle of Good Hope on 11 June 1768.

This X is the hand mark of Frans.

As delegates, \[signed\] T.C. Rönnekamp, Johs. van Sittert.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

[^1]: * Marten Melk was extremely active as an entrepreneur and
    businessman from the late 1740s onwards and amassed a fortune by the
    time of his death in 1781, not least because he dominated the
    lucrative wine trade for more than 20 years. He came into possession
    of the farm Elsenburg, close to Stellenbosch, by marrying the widow
    Anna Hop in 1752, thereby greatly improving his fortune. On his life
    and activities, see Cockrell 2001. *

[^2]: * *Mandoors* were used in the Company Slave Lodge. Shell (1994:
    180-85) suggests they were mulattos who had been raised in the
    Lodge. There is no toponym given for Willem, which may suggest that
    he was a locally-born slave who would have been well known to Melk
    and trusted by him. *Mandoors* were rarely used by the free
    burghers, and usually only on the largest farms, such as Elsenburg,
    or on cattle posts or smaller farms away from the owner’s main
    residence. They were usually given special privileges, see Ross
    1983: 29-30 and Worden 1985: 88-9, 107-8.*

[^3]: * While during the 1760s arable farmers in the Stellenbosch
    district possessed on average fewer than ten male slaves (Worden
    1985: 29), Melk was in the exceptional position of owning between
    110 and 120 during this period (Cockrell 2001: 105). Such a large
    number of slaves not only meant that he could afford to have
    specialist slaves, like the *mandoor* (and also cooks, artisans,
    wagonmakers, etc.), but also that special housing was needed for
    them. Contemporary visitors to Elsenburg called it a ‘little
    village’ as it contained numerous workstores, warehouses, cellars,
    corrals and other out-buildings. In addition, there were two slave
    houses and a slave school (Fagan 1984: 35-37). *

[^4]:  *Sic*. See n. 7 below.

[^5]:  Tables refer to the compact layers of bones which cover the
    brain.

[^6]:  This was the sentence recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 394, f.
    515. Frans was found guilty of manslaughter, and said in his defence
    that ‘den slaaf Willem soo hard niet geslagen te hebben, dat hij
    naar sijne gedagten, daarvan gestorven sijn soude’ (he had not hit
    the slave Willem so hard that, in his opinion, he would have died as
    a result), CJ 50, ff. 46-8. Apart from the documents printed here,
    the documentation for this case includes the testimonies of Perfors
    van de Caab, Achilles van Madagascar, Silvia van Madagascar and
    Martje van Madagascar, CJ 394, f. 518-24. See also Ross 1979: 429-30
    on this case.

[^7]:  *Sic*. In the *sententie* her name is spelt ‘Mars’, but in the
    other documentation ‘Martje’. Both Silvia and Martje were from
    Madagascar and so would have been able to talk with Frans in their
    own language, giving rise to the suspicion that that they were
    telling him about Willem’s whereabouts. In their own testimonies (CJ
    394, ff. 523-24) they both denied that they were with Frans and said
    that they were sleeping in the women’s quarters.
