# JEPHTA VAN DE CAAB

*In this letter, the landdrost of Stellenbosch reported a fight with a
tragic ending on a farm in the Wagenmakersvallei and asked the Council
of Justice how to proceed in this unusual case. The incident is of note
for several reasons. The fight, involving slaves and a Khoi worker,
broke out over disputed ownership of bamboo canes that were growing in
garden plots assigned to individual slaves, and the court seems here to
have recognised their claims to its produce.[^1] Moreover, the
case unusually shows an elderly slave and his adult son on the same
farm, and gives a rare insight into family relationships amongst
slaves.[^2] *

*Jephta’s attempt to defend his father led to his accidental killing of
the old man. The fiscal was uncertain how to proceed with such strongly
mitigating circumstances and although the court could not definitively
say what had happened, it did not see fit to punish any of the
participants.*[^3]

**CJ 397** Criminele Process Stukken, 1770, ff. 172-81v.

Aan den edelagtbaare heer Jan Willem Cloppenburg, praesident, beneevens
den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements.

Edelagtbaare heer en heeren!

Op bekoomen berigt van de weeduwe wijlen den burger Roelof van der Burg,
dat een haarer slaven, in naame Caesar, op derselver, in de Wagenmakers
Valleij geleegene, plaats doodgeslagen was, heeft den ondergetekende
landdrost het cadaver laaten besigtigen en van dat geval de nodige
enquesten doen inwinnen; weshalven dan, ingevolge den teneur van dien,
de eer heeft u edelagtbaarens in alle eerbied voor te draagen, dat:

Wanneer den slave jongen Pandek van Maccasser, ofte den relatant onder
*littera* A, op den 20^e^ der gepasseerde maand September, ’s
voordemiddags, naar gissing de klocke neegen uuren, naar den, ter sijner
lijfvrouws plaats sijnden, wijngaard om te arbeijden, en de meede slaven
Caesar en Jephta, alsmeede den Hottentot Dirk, langs den derwaards
leijdenden weg voorbij de thuijnen der slaven, om uijen te planten,
gegaan waaren, den slaaf Jephta, een door hem Pandek in sijn thuijn
selfs geplante en aldaar opgroeijende bamboes, niet alleen schoon
gemaakt, maar ook getragt had sig toe te eijgenen; weshalven gemelde
Jephta door hem Pandek daarin belet en teffens te gemoed gevoerd was dat
hij, Pandek dien bamboes in sijn thuijn selfs geplant hebbende,
gevolgelijk hem alleen toebehoorde, waarover tusschen hun beijden
eenigen woordenstrijd ontstaan sijnde, had meergemelde Jephta hem Pandek
te meermaalen om te backeleijen uijtgeëijscht, waartoe hij Pandek
geensints geneegen geweest, maar naar den wijngaard aan sijn werk gegaan
was.

Dat voormelde Pandek op het gesigt dat den Hottentot Dirk almeede over
den bamboes met geciteerde Jephta in rusie en vervolgens handgemeen
geraakt was, mitsgaders den slaaf Caesar een stuk hout quam op te
neemen, en sig daarmeede naar de strijdende parthijen begaf om die rusie
te stuijten, dierhalven insgelijx naar derwaards gegaan was; dan
nademaal gerepte Caesar juijst op het moment van desselfs aankomst het,
in handen hebbende, stuk hout omhoog geheeven had, ten eijnde den
Hottentot Dirk daarmeede te slaan, had hij Pandek, onder het seggen tot
hem Caesar: Wat wilt gij doen? Gij moet niet slaan!, de strijdende
tragten van den anderen te scheijden, hetgeen van dat effect geweest
was, dat gedagte Caesar dat stuk hout van sig geworpen, dog voorseijde
Pandek daarop voor in het hair gevat en hij Pandek sulx meede aan
gemelde Caesar gedaan had, invoegen sij beijden dus aan ’t worstelen
geraakt waaren.

Dat meergemelde Jephta alsdoen den Hottentot Dirk losgelaaten en, ten
eijnde sijn vader, voormelde Caesar te hulp te koomen, een daar digtbij
een eijken boom leggende bamboes opgenoomen hebbende, met voorneemen,
soo als het gemelde Pandek uijt de door hem Jephta gemaakte beweeging
toescheen, om hem Pandek daarmeede een slag toe te brengen, dien slag
egter, soo door het schielijk toeloopen van meergesegde Jephta, als de
beweeging die hij Pandek en gedagte Caesar onder het worstelen met hunne
hoofden maakten, gemist en gevolgelijk niet hem Pandek, maar
eevengedagte Caesar, ofte de vader van gerepete Jephta getroffen had,
waardoor denselven eeven als in swaare duijseling op de aarde blijvende
leggen, vervolgens naar sijn lijfvrouws wooning gebragt en dus dien
eijgensten dag aan de wonde overleeden was.

Sie daar, edelagtbaare heer en edele heeren, naarvolgens het verhaal van
meergeciteerde Pandek het geval voor oogen gelegt. Veelgemelde slaaf
Jephta dierhalven, ingevolge het bovengemelde verhaal van den meede
slaaf Pandek en vervolgens den Hottentot Dirk, op de gedaane
beschuldiging van eevengemelde Jephta, in apprehensie genoomen sijnde,
is door den ondergetekende alle moeijte aangewend om nader ligt in deese
saak te bekoomen, dog vermits niemand anders als de hier voor genoemde
slaven Pandek en Jephta, mitsgaders den gerepten Hottentot Dirk, bij het
geval in quaestie praesent geweest sijn, heeft den ondergetekende geen
de minste nadere elucidatie kunnen bekoomen, en dienvolgens, hem Dirk en
Jephta voor heeren gecommitteerdens uijt deese illustre vierschaar op
interrogatoriën gehoord; waarbij hij Dirk in de principaale saak met het
bovengemelde, door Pandek gegeeven relaas, harmonieert, excepto dat hij
Dirk op de 9^e^ vraag, dicteerende: Of hij gevangen niet met Jephta
rusie bekoomen heeft, en waarover deselve ontstaan is? Antwoord: Met
Jephta geen rusie gehad te hebben, maar dat hij Pandek en Jephta,
wanneer over den bamboes backeleijden, van malkanderen geholpen en hij
Jephta hem Dirk alsdoen ondergegooijt en in desselfs duijm gebeeten had,
negeerende meede dat den ouder slaaf een bamboes in handen gehad
hebbende, gemelde Pandek op het moment dat gemelde Caesar den bamboes
reets had opgeheeven en gemelde Dirk daarmeede hadde willen slaan, dien
slag afgekeert en tot meergemelde Caesar gesegt hebben soude: Wat doet
gij? Gij moet niet slaan!, dan geciteerde Jephta in sijne
interrogatoriën alles koomende te ontkennen, segt: Dat Pandek den
*auctor rixae* geweest is, en hem Jephta, wanneer ter ordre van sijn
vader Caesar den bamboes had schoon gemaakt met een mes uijtgeëijsht
had; *vide* het antwoord op articuls 5 en 7, mitsgaders dat Pandek
eijndelijk van hem weggegaan sijnde, daarop den Hottentot Dirk, dewelke
altijd met Pandek had tesamen gedaan, teegens denselven over den
sweepstok ofte bovengemelde bamboes rusie gemaakt had, sonder dat hij
weeten wil dat sijn vader Caesar met een bamboes ofte een stuk hout hem
te hulp gekoomen was, soo als uijt de antwoorden sub articuls 8 et seqq.
kan beoogt worden, seggende wijders dat Pandek, met sijn vader Caesar
bakkeleijende, desselfs knie op de borst van gemelde sijn vader, die
tusschen twee wijngaardstokken agterover gevallen was, geset en
vervolgens in ’t hair gevat had, mitsgaders dus tesamen aan ’t worstelen
geraakt waaren, op welk gesigt hij Jephta sijn vader te hulp gekoomen
was; sonder dat egter weeten wil, een bamboes genoomen en sijn vader
daarmeede een slag toegebragt te hebben, seggende ter contrarie: Dat den
Hottentot Dirk den bamboes, die agter een eijkenboom stond, en tot een
scherm gebruijkt wierd, had genoomen, en hem Jephta daarmeede een slag
willen toebrengen, dog dat hij dien slag ontweeken sijnde, daardoor sijn
vader getroffen was; hebbende hij Jephta alsdoen nog geroepen: O God!
Vader! Dirk slaat u!, invoegen hij Jephta sig tragt ten eenemaal te
verontschuldigen.

Het is nu wel waar, dat den slaaf Pandek de eerste geweest is die met
eevengemelde Jephta de rusie of twist aangevangen heeft, en dus als de
*auctor rixae* aangemerkt werden kan; dog, wanneer men considereert dat
voorseijde Jephta datgeene hetwelk meergemelde Pandek toebehoorde en
door hemselfs, denkelijk tot sijn eijgen gebruijkt, geplant was, sig
tragte toe te eijgenen en het *dominium* daarover exerceerde, soo is het
seeker, dat gerepte Jephta daartoe aanleijding gegeeven en dus de eerste
oorsaak daarvan is geweest; dit vast gesteld sijnde, dat meergemelde
Jephta, naar dat Pandek van hem weggegaan was, ter saake den Hottentot
Dirk voormelde Pandek van hem afgetrokken had, met hem Dirk in
woordenstrijd sal geraakt sijn, en gesegde Caesar, ofte den
needergeslagenen, in gedagten dat hij Dirk met gemelde sijn soon Jephta
bakkeleijde, denselven oversulx te hulp gekoomen is, mitsgaders dat
Pandek, vermits eevengedagte Caesar, volgens sijn seggen, een stuk hout
in handen hadde, en g’intentioneert was, voormelde Dirk daarmeede te
slaan, getragt heeft die strijdende van den anderen te scheijden en,
dienvolgens, den ouden jongen van hem Dirk heeft afgetrokken, sulx
gemelde Caesar hem Pandek meede op sijn beurt aangevat hebbende, de
natuurlijke liefde in den slaaf Jephta soodanigen uijtwerking gedaan
had, dat hij sijnen ouden en afgeleefden vader, dewelke teegens hem
Pandek veels te swak was om te bakkeleijen, gesecundeert en dus,
denkende geciteerde Pandek met een, agter een eijkenboom gestaan
hebbenden, bamboes, ter loslating van sijn vader, een slag toe te
brengen, ongelukkigerwijse sijn eijgen vader geraakt heeft.

Ongeagt egter van alle de poginge die den ondergetekende gewent heeft om
voorseijde Jephta tot bekentenis te brengen, heeft denselven daaromtrent
niet kunnen reüsseeren want, alhoewel dikwils gemelde Jephta
reïterativelijk te gemoed gevoerd is, dat hij door het te hulp koomen
van sijn vader immers maar gedaan had datgeene wat de liefde tot sijn
vader hem inboesemde, terwijl de banden der natuur niet konden toelaten,
dat sijn ouden vader van een ander geslagen wierd; gevolgelijk het te
hulp koomen van sijn vader geensins een onredelijke saak quam te sijn
ende dus aan gesegde sijn vader toegebragte slag, blijkens het beloop
van de geheelen toedragt des verschils in quaestie, seekerlijk eenelijk
bij ongeluk geschied sij, invoegen het beste was, dat hij die saak maar
quam te belijden, gemerkt men, soo als voorsegt tog uijt de
omstandigheijd klaar bevroeden konde, dat hij sulx, ofschoon niet *animo
doloso*, nogtans gedaan had; soo is hetselve egter tevergeefs geweest,
overmits denselven absolutelijk bleef negeeren den slag met de bamboes
toegebragt te hebben, allegueerende in het antwoord op de 17^e^ vraag
sijner interrogatoriën: Dat den Hottentot Dirk met den, agter een eijken
boom staanden bamboes, hem Jephta, middelerwijl Pandek en sijn vader met
backeleijen beesig waaren, een slag had soeken toe te brengen, dog dat
hij den slag ontweeken sijnde, alsdoen sijn vader, voormelde Caesar, was
geraakt; en dat hij nog geroepen had: O God Vader! Dirk slaat u!, gelijk
meede op het 20^e^ articul, dat hij Jephta naar het voorgevallene naar
huijs geloopen en tot sijne lijfvrouw gesegt had: Dat se sijn vader dood
sloegen!, hetgeen dan door de, te dier tijd bij sijne lijfvrouw geweest
sijnde, huijsvrouw van den burger Hendrik Groothuijs in haare, onder
*littera* D bijgevoegde, verklaring bevestigt word; welke verklaring den
ondergetekende egter, vermits de haar, elders ten plattenlande
bevindende, deposante niets anders met relatie tot dat geval te melden
weet, maar ongerecolleert gelaaten heeft. Wat nu betreft het
bovengemelde door hem, Jephta ten opsigte der gedaane bekentmaaking aan
sijne lijfvrouw, te weeten: Dat se sijn vader dood sloegen!, soo moet
den ondergetekende daar omtrent advanceeren dat sulx, volgens des
ondergetekendes sustenue, hem Jephta, weegens den gegeeven slag in
quaestie niet het minste baten kan, dewijl hij mogelijk, naar het
volbrengen van dien slag, op het gesigt dat hij, in plaats van den slaaf
Pandek, sijnen ouden vader, en dat wel dusdanig dat daardoor in swaare
duijseling bleef leggen, geraakt had, om sijn lijfvrouw in het denkbeeld
te brengen dat hij sulx niet hadde gedaan, dienvolgens sig soodanig kan
aangesteld en een misbaar gemaakt hebben alsof sijn vader weesentlijk
door een ander geslagen was.

Den ondergetekende wijders ter ondersoek treedende van de, door gemelde
Jephta omtrent den Hottentot Dirk gedaane, inculpatie, namentlijk dat,
wanneer Pandek met zijn vader aan het worstelen geraakt was, den
Hottentot Dirk (seekerlijk uijt hoofde dat hij Dirk niet gedoogen wilde
dat gerepte Jephta sijn vader te hulp koomen soude) een, agter een
eijkeboom staande en tot een scherm gebruijkt werdende, bamboes had
genoomen, en hem Jephta daarmeede willen slaan, dog dat voormelde Jephta
dien slag ontweeken sijnde, dus sijn vader geraakt had; *vide* articuls
15 en 16 sijner interrogatoriën, soo schijnt het wel niet van alle
mogelijkheijd ontbloot te sijn, te meer wanneer men reflexie slaat op
het door eevengemelde Jephta op de 10^e^ vraag sijner interrogatoriën
gegeeven antwoord, alwaar segt: Dirk heeft teegens mij rusie gemaakt
over de sweepstock (of bamboes), hebbende, N.B., Pandek en Dirk altijd
tesaamen gedaan, waardoor hij seekerlijk wil te kennen geeven dat sij
altijd goede vrienden geweest sijn en malkanderen bijgestaan hebben;
invoegen men soude supponeeren dat hij Dirk voormelde Jephta niet alleen
weegens het te hulp koomen van sijn vader, maar ook om reedenen dat hij
hem, volgens articul 9 sijner beantwoorde vraagpoincten, ondergegooijt
en in sijn duijm gebeeten had, heeft tragten te slaan, hetgeen hij Dirk
egter wel degelijk negeert, voorgeevende op de 17^e^ articul sijner
vraagpoincten, dat hij, om alle ongelukken voor te koomen, wanneer
Pandek en Caesar backeleijden, alle de daar leggende steenen en
wijngaard stokken uijt de weg had geworpen, ja selfs dat gemelde Jephta
met den aan Caesar gegeevenen slag, hem Dirk vermits onder den slag was,
meede nog geraakt had. Des de saak, vermits geene andere getuijgen
daarbij praesent geweest sijn, seer intricaat en duijster blijft; dog
soo wanneer men aan het relaas van den slaaf Pandek sal geloof slaan,
hetgeen den ondergetekende het best dunkt met het geval te quadreeren,
soo soude den slaaf Jephta sijn vader uijt liefde te hulp gekoomen
weesende, seekerlijk den manslag buijten sijn wil en verwagting, en dus
niet met erg of list geperpetreert moeten hebben, sijnde volgens de
verklaring van den ’s colonies chirurgijn, Georg Carel Lodewijk Geering,
de slag van het slinkerdeel des hoofds door het cranium de *dura et
piamater* gepenetreert, waarop een apoplexia en gevolgelijk de dood
heeft moeten volgen; overmits den ondergetekende dan eens, deels door de
over en weeder voortgebragte beschuldigingen van den Hottentot Dirk en
den slaaf Jephta, in het onseekere gesteld is, wien van beijden hij als
schuldig aan den *casu fortuito* begaane manslag actioneeren sal en, aan
den andere kant, uijt den te samenhang des gevals, den vertoonder geene
middelen overig schijnen te sijn om langs den een of anderen regtelijken
weg verdere naspeuring te doen, soo neemt denselven den toevlugt tot u
edelagtbaarens met eerbiedige versoek dat u edelagtbaarens deese saak
aangaande soodanig gelieven te jugeeren, als naar derselver hooge
wijsheid sullen vinden te behooren.

\[get.\] L.S. Faber.

*Exhibitum in judicio*, den 12^e^ April 1770.

TRANSLATION

To the honourable Jan Willem Cloppenburg, president, as well as the
honourable Council of Justice of this government.

Honourable lord and lords!

Upon receiving the news from the widow of the late burgher Roelof van
der Burg, that one of her slaves, by the name of Caesar, had been beaten
to death on her farm, situated in the Wagenmakers valley, the
undersigned landdrost had the corpse inspected and did the necessary
enquiries, for which reason he has the honour to present, in accordance
with the tenor of this information, with all respect: That at nine
o’clock, at a guess, on the morning of the 20^th^ of the past month
September, when the slave *jongen* Pandek van Maccasser, or the
testifier in \[the document marked with\] the letter A, was on his way
to labour in the vineyard on the farm of his mistress, and his fellow
slaves Caesar and Jephta, along with the Hottentot Dirk, were going
along the same way leading past the gardens of the slaves, in order to
plant onions there, the slave Jephta not only cleaned, but also tried to
appropriate for himself, the bamboo growing there and planted by Pandek
himself in his own garden; wherefore the said Jephta was prevented from
doing this by Pandek and was at the same time informed that he, Pandek,
had planted this bamboo himself in his garden and that it therefore
belonged to him alone; about which there then developed between them
both an altercation, with the aforementioned Jephta several times
challenging Pandek to fight, to which Pandek was in no ways inclined but
carried on with his work in the vineyard.

Upon seeing that the Hottentot Dirk also started to quarrel over the
bamboo and then came to blows with the said Jephta, and also that the
slave Caesar picked up a piece of wood and proceeded with it towards the
fighting parties, Pandek likewise went thither in order to prevent this
quarrel and, since the said Caesar, at the very moment of his arrival,
raised up high the piece of wood he held in his hands in order to beat
the Hottentot Dirk with it, Pandek, while saying to Caesar: “What are
you going to do? You mustn’t hit!”, tried to separate the fighting men
from each other, which was to no effect. That the said Caesar cast that
piece of wood from him, but grabbed the aforesaid Pandek by the front of
his hair, while Pandek did the same to the said Caesar, so that in this
way they both started struggling with each other.

That the aforementioned Jephta then let the Hottentot Dirk go free in
order to go and help his father, the aforementioned Caesar, and picked
up a bamboo stick lying close by at an oak tree, intending, or so it
seemed to the said Pandek from the movements made by Jephta, to give
Pandek a blow with it, but that this blow missed him – both through the
sudden storming forward of the aforementioned Jephta, and through the
movement which Pandek and the said Caesar were making with their heads
during their struggle – and instead of hitting him, Pandek, it hit
Caesar, or the father of the said Jephta, as a result of which the same
remained lying on the ground as if suffering from heavy dizziness,
whereupon he was taken to the house of his mistress and passed away that
very day as a result of this wound.

And here, honourable lord and your honourables, you have the case
presented to you in accordance with the story of the aforementioned
Pandek. Hence, when the aforementioned slave Jephta, in consequence of
the above narration of his fellow slave Pandek, and then the Hottentot
Dirk, as a result of the accusation made by the said Jephta, were taken
into custody, the undersigned spared no trouble in order to shed greater
light on this case, but since nobody else other than the aforementioned
slaves Pandek and Jephta, as also the said Hottentot Dirk, were present
at the event in question, the undersigned could not find even the least
bit of elucidation and, accordingly, interrogated Dirk and Jephta before
the honourable delegates from this illustrious Court of Justice, in
which \[interrogation\] Dirk agrees with the principal tenor of the
above statement given by Pandek, with the exception that Dirk answered
on the ninth question, namely: “If the prisoner started quarrelling with
Jephta, and over what did this originate?”, answer: Not to have had any
quarrel with Jeptha, but that when Pandek and Jephta were fighting over
the bamboo, he had helped them apart and that Jeptha then threw him down
and bit him on his thumb, denying also: that the older slave had had a
bamboo stick in his hands, that the said Pandek, at the moment when the
said Caesar had already raised the bamboo and wanted to hit the said
Dirk with it, had prevented this blow, and that he had said to the
aforementioned Caesar: “What are you doing? You mustn’t hit!” The said
Jephta denied everything in his interrogation, saying that Pandek was
the *auctor rixae*[^4] and had challenged him, Jephta, with a knife
when he was busy weeding the bamboo on the order of his father, Caesar;
see the answers to articles 5 and 7; as also that when Pandek had
finally left him, the Hottentot Dirk, who has always ganged up with
Pandek, then quarrelled with him over the whip-sticks, or the
aforementioned bamboo, without him wanting to know anything about his
father, Caesar, coming to help with a bamboo stick or a piece of wood;
as can be seen in the answers to articles 8 and following; saying
moreover that when Pandek was fighting with his father, Caesar, he had
put his knee on the chest of his father, who had fallen backwards
between two grapevines, and then took him by the hair and thus got to
wrestle together, upon which sight Jephta came to help his father;
without him wanting to know anything about having taken a bamboo stick
and dealing his father a blow with it; saying, on the contrary, that the
Hottentot Dirk had taken the bamboo stick, which was standing behind an
oak tree and was being used in a shelter, and wanted to deal him,
Jephta, a blow with it, but that he had managed to dodge this blow, as a
result of which his father was hit, with him even calling at that
moment: “O God! Father! Dirk hit you!”; in which manner he, Jephta, is
trying to excuse himself wholly.

It is indeed true that the slave Pandek had been the first to start the
quarrel or disagreement with the aforementioned Jephta, and so can be
taken for the *auctor rixae*, yet when one considers that Jephta was
trying to appropriate that which belonged to the aforementioned Pandek
and was planted by himself, probably for his own use, and wanted to
exercise power over it, so it is certain that the said Jephta occasioned
it and was thus the prime cause of it; this having been established,
that the aforementioned Jephta, after Pandek had gone from him, got
involved in an altercation with the Hottentot Dirk because Dirk had
pulled the aforementioned Pandek from him, and the said Caesar, or the
person who got hit, thinking that Dirk was fighting with his said son
Jephta, therefore came to help him, as also that Pandek, since the said
Caesar, according to what he \[Pandek\] says, had a piece of wood in his
hand and was of the intention to hit the aforementioned Dirk with it,
tried to separate the two fighters from each other, and to this end
pulled the old *jongen* from Dirk, when the said Caesar in his turn then
took on Pandek, the natural love of the slave Jephta had such an effect
that he assisted his old and decrepit father, who was far too weak to
fight against Pandek, and thus, thinking to give the said Pandek a blow
with a bamboo stick which stood behind an oak tree, in order to release
his father, in an accidental manner hit his own father.

In spite of all the attempts that the undersigned had endeavoured to
bring the aforesaid Jephta to confess, he was unable to succeed with
this because, although he often and repeatedly impressed upon him that,
by coming to the aid of his father, he had after all only done that
which love for his father inspired him to do, since the bonds of nature
could not tolerate that his aged father be beaten by another, therefore
coming to the aid of his father can in no ways be considered an
unreasonable matter, and that therefore the blow he dealt his said
father, as appears from the course of all the particulars of the
disagreement in question, could certainly only have been done by
accident; so that it would be best if he confesses the whole matter,
since one, as said before, can comprehend clearly from the circumstances
that he had, if not *animo doloso*,[^5] nonetheless done it; but this
was all in vain, since he absolutely continued to deny having dealt the
blow with the bamboo stick, alleging in his answer to the 17^th^
question of his interrogation: That the Hottentot Dirk had tried to deal
him, Jephta, a blow with the bamboo stick standing behind the oak tree,
while Pandek and his father were busy fighting, yet that he had dodged
this blow, which is when his father, the aforementioned Caesar, was hit,
and that he had even called: “O God, Father! Dirk is hitting you!”, as
also, to the 20^th^ article, that after the incident he had run to the
house and told his mistress that they were beating his father to death,
which is confirmed by the wife of the burgher Hendrik Groothuijs, who
had been with his mistress at this time, in her statement added hereto
under the letter D, which statement, however, the undersigned had left
unverified since the deponent, who lives elsewhere in the rural areas,
did not have anything else to state regarding this case. Now, as regards
the abovementioned by Jephta concerning the announcement he made to his
mistress, namely: That they are beating his father to death, the
undersigned has to put forward that this cannot, according to the
undersigned’s argument, profit Jephta in the least as regards dealing
the blow in question, since it is possible that he – after having dealt
this blow and seeing that instead of the slave Pandek, he had hit his
aged father, and in such a way that, as a result of this, he remained
lying as if suffering from heavy dizziness – could have acted, in order
to give his mistress the impression that he had not done it, in this way
and made a huge scene as if his father had really been beaten by
another.

The undersigned further investigated the accusation made by the said
Jeptha concerning the Hottentot Dirk, namely that when Pandek started
wrestling with his father, the Hottentot Dirk (surely because Dirk did
not want to allow the said Jephta to go and help his father) took the
bamboo stick, standing behind an oak tree and being used in a shelter,
and wanted to hit Jephta with it, yet that the said Jephta dodged this
blow and it thus hit his father; see articles 15 and 16 of his
interrogation. This seems not to be devoid of all possibility, even more
so when one reflects upon the answer given by the said Jephta to the
10^th^ question of his interrogation, where he says: “Dirk quarrelled
with me over the whip-stick (or bamboo stick) since, note well, Pandek
and Dirk always ganged up”, through which he probably wants to indicate
that they have always been good friends and supported each other, so
that one could suppose that Dirk tried to hit the aforementioned Jephta,
not only because he came to aid his father, but also because he,
according to article 9 of the questions he answered, had thrown him down
and bit him on his thumb, which Dirk, however, vigorously denies in
article 17 of his questions: that when Pandek and Caesar were fighting,
he, in order to prevent any accidents, cast away all the stones and
vines from the way, yes even that the said Jephta, when he dealt the
blow to Caesar, also touched Dirk since he was in the path of the blow;
so that the case, as there were no other witnesses present, remains very
complicated and obscure, yet if one believes the testimony of the slave
Pandek, which the undersigned thinks squares the best with the case,
then the slave Jephta would have come to aid his father out of love, and
certainly must have perpetrated the manslaughter beyond his will and
expectation, and certainly not with evil and cunning. According to the
statement of the district’s surgeon, Georg Carel Lodewijk Geering, the
blow to the left side of the head penetrated through the skull to the
*dura* and *pia mater*,[^6] whereupon apoplexy and death must have
followed. Since the undersigned, on the one hand, is uncertain, due to
the mutually produced accusations of the Hottentot Dirk and the slave
Jephta, about which one of the two he should act against as guilty in
the case of accidentally perpetrated manslaughter, and since, on the
other hand, from the circumstances of this case, it seems as if there
are no means remaining to the exhibiter for further investigation via
one or the other legal avenue, he is having recourse to your honours,
humbly requesting that your honours please judge this in such a way as
you would deem fitting in accordance with your great wisdom.

\[signed\] L.S. Faber.

Exhibit in court, 12 April 1770.

[^1]: * In some transatlantic plantations producing non-food crops, it
    was common for slaves to be given their own plots of ground on which
    they could grow food in their spare time, both for their own
    consumption and for sale (Genovese 1970: 535-40). Although this
    practice was not widespread on Cape farms, where grain and meat were
    the main produce, slave garden-plots were found in some cases (Kolb
    1777, vol. II: 306; Mentzel 1944: iii, 110; Worden 1985: 91-2; and
    Mason 1994: 76-83). *

[^2]: * For other examples of slave families, see the references in 1749
    Reijnier van Madagascar, n. 1.*

[^3]: * The case came before the court on 12 April 1770 and was held
    over while the documentation (which included the testimonies of
    Pandek van Maccasser and Anna Maria Bruijning, the interrogations of
    Dirk and Jephta and a surgeon’s report, CJ 397, ff. 172-99) was
    circulated among its members. On 10 May 1770 it was agreed that
    Caesar’s death appeared to have been accidental (‘een casus
    fortuitus’), but that the slaves Jephta and Pandek should be
    returned to their owner with the order that they should not be sold
    without first informing the court, and that the Khoi Dirk be
    retained in case he could shed any further light on the matter, CJ
    52, ff. 32-3 and 45-8. *

[^4]:  Legal Latin for ‘the instigator of the dispute’.

[^5]:  Latin for ‘with a deceitful spirit’, probably here used as the
    equivalent of ‘with malice aforethought’.

[^6]:  Underneath the skull there are three membranes (*meninges*) which
    further protect the brain, the outer one of which is called the
    *dura mater* and the innermost one the *pia mater *(Solomon 1992:
    102-3).
