1775 MAART VAN BENCOULE

*This incident of the tracking down, shooting and capturing of a group
of Cape Town runaway slaves who had raided a farm in the Piketberg, is
primarily of interest for what it reveals about the linguistic
complexity of the Cape as late as the 1770s.[^1] Whereas in the
previous case communication problems arose because of the variety of
languages spoken amongst the slaves, this one illustrates how slaves
were linguistically differentiated from the settlers. The runaways, who
were all slaves from the East Indies, spoke Malay to one another, which
the farmers and Khoi who apprehended them could not understand, although
they attempted to communicate with them in Portuguese.[^2] *

*The slaves tried to run *amok,[^3]* but were shot or captured
before they could attack any of their pursuers. Two were killed, while
Maart van Bencoule[^4] and Kuijper van Macassar were captured and
questioned.[^5] However, the case against them was not forwarded
to the Court of Justice and it is not known how they were
punished.[^6] Also of interest is the farmers’ use of the Khoi Jan
as a tracker to locate the barefooted runaways. *

**1/STB 3/11** Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeven, ter requisitie van den heer landdrost, Marthinus
Adrianus Bergh, door den veldcorpaal Gerrit Smit, van competenten
ouderdom, zijnde van den volgende inhoud, namentlijk:

Dat op Dinsdag, den 2^e\ ^deeser, wanneer den relatant des morgens ter
zijner plaats de Drogerijs Cloof, gelegen agter de Piquet Bergen,
ontwaard had dat desselfs molenhuijs des nagts opengebroken en daarin
twee mudden meel op den grond uitgestort en de beijde sakken met eenig
meel weggenomen waren, den relatant en de bij hem uitgespannen zijnde
burger Gideon van Zijl Pz., nevens een Hottentot, Jan genaamt, omstreeks
desselfs plaats nasoeking gedaan en eenige sporen van menschen
barrevoets ontwaard hadden, hij relatant en gemelde Van Zijl, ieder met
een geladen geweer gewapend, nevens gedagte Hottentot Jan en seekere
Bastert, Gerrit genaamt, welken laatstgemelde eenelijk een kirrij bij
zig had, op voormelde sporen waren afgegaan, als wanneer zijlieden
omtrent een half uur gaans van des relatants plaats, bij een bosch aan
de rivier eenige kleederen zagen leggen en, genaderd zijnde, vier
jongens, die aldaar in ’t bosch lagen, ontdekt hebbende; den relatant
hun aanstonds toegeroepen had dat zijlieden moesten ten voorschijn
komen, waarop deselve in een reij voor dat bosch waren komen staan,
hebbende een derselve een blote hertsvanger in d’ eene en een mes in de
andere hand, gelijk een der anderen twee blote messen, en de beijde
overige ieder een dito in de hand hadden; waarop den relatant hun een en
andermaal had toegeroepen dat zijlieden hun scherp wegwerpen en een voor
een bij hem komen moesten, op ’twelke gemelde vier jongens in ’t Malais
spraken, hetgeen den relatant niet kunnende verstaan, hun in ’t
Portugeesch nogmaals gesegd had dat zijlieden hunne messen wegwerpen en
bij hem komen moesten, hadden zijlieden, zonder zig egter van hunne
messen en hertsvanger te ontdoen, zig voorwaards naar den relatant
begeven, die hun daarop quam te zeggen van terug te blijven, onder
herhaling van hun scherp eerst weg te gooijen; waarop deselve bleven
staan, terwijl de relatant zijn vorensgesegde nogmaals herhaald
hebbende, onder bedreijging van op hen te zullen schieten bij aldien zij
hun scherp niet wilden wegwerpen, hadden zijlieden nogtans sulx niet
willen doen; op ’twelk den relatant voorts tegens voornoemde Van Zijl
quam te zeggen dat hij eene dier slaven maar naar de beenen moeste
schieten, waardoor zijlieden zig dan wel gevangen geeven zouden; hetgeen
door gedagte Van Zijl gedaan en den getroffene jongen ter aarde gevallen
zijnde, kwamen voorts de drie anderen onder ’t roepen van: Amok! Amok!
Matta Garra![^7], met hun scherp op gemelde Van Zijl inlopen
denwelken, als zijn geweer niet geladen zijnde, zig voorts ter vlugt
begeven had, terwijl den relatant daarop eene dier drossers, die ’t
naast agter Van Zijl was, zodanig met een schoot uit zijn geweer
getroffen had, dat denselven terstond dood ter aarde gevallen was,
terwijl de twee overige voorts op den relatant (die zijn geweer nog niet
geladen had) inquamen en hun, naar gissing, wel 150 treden vervolgd
hadden, waarna zij zig weder naar hunne vorige plaats in ’t bosch hadden
begeven; terwijl den relatant en Van Zijl intusschen hunne geweers
geladen en gedagte twee jongens nagevolgd weesende, gemelde Van Zijl op
een derselven geschoten, dog niet geraakt hebbende; had den relatant
voorts op denselven, die zijn mes niet wilde wegwerpen, onder ’t roepen
van: Bie, Bie, en op hem afkwam, terwijl den relatant weder geretireerd
zijnde, en hem nogmaals toegeroepen te hebben van het mes weg te
gooijen, zig gevangen te geeven; met een kogel door het lijf geschoten,
zodanig dat opstonds was komen neder te vallen, dog zig tevergeefs weder
hebbende willlen opregten, was denselven opstonds met ’t mes in de hand
komen te sterven. Waarna de vierde van hun, op ’t bevel van den
relatant, zijn mes voorts weg gegooijd en zig gevangen gegeven had;
hebbende den relatant in ’t voorseijde bosch een halve mud meel van
’tgeen zijlieden des vorige nagts gestolen hadden, nog gevonden, en van
de laatstgemelde verstaan dat zijlieden lijfeijgenen waren van den
fabriek aan Cabo de Goede Hoop.

Anders niet verklarende, geeft den relatant voor reedenen van wetenschap
als in den text, bereijd zijnde het vorenstaande, des vereijscht
werdende, met solemnelen eede nader te zullen gestand doen.

Aldus gerelateerd ter secretarije aan Stellenbosch, den 8^e^ Maij 1775,
in ’t bijweesen van den bode Morits Herman Otto Woeke en den burger
Johannes Engel, als getuijgen.

\[get.\] Gerret Smiet \[*sic*\].

Als getuijgen, \[get.\] M.H.O. Woeke, J. Engel.

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] A. Faure, secretaris.

**1/STB 3/11** Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeven, ter requisitie van den heer landdrost, Marthinus
Adrianus Bergh, door de slaaf Maart van Bencoule van competenten
ouderdom, toebehorende den fabricq, monsieur Marthinus van Oorden,
zijnde van de volgenden inhoud, namentlijk:

Dat wanneer den relatant met drie der mede slave van zijnen lijfheer, in
naame Pallas, Julij en Kuijper, voor eenige tijd van de Caab opgedrost
waren, zijnde daartoe door den slaaf Pallas verleijd geworden, zig mede
genomen hadden: ses messen en een hertsvanger. Dat zijlieden waren
gegaan naar een seker berg, die de relatant niet wist te noemen, als
wanneer zijlieden aldaar geslapen hebbende, door vier menschen, zijnde
twee Duijtsche, die geweer \[*sic*\] bij zig hadden, en twee
Hottentotten, met assegaijen gewapend, opgewekt waren geworden; waarop
zijlieden, ieder met een mes in de hand, opgestaan weesende, de
relatant, die zijne ogen nog quam te wrijven, met een schoot zodanig in
zijn been getroffen was, dat opstonds was komen neder te vallen, zonder
verder meerder te kunnen relateeren of de anderen slaven zig te weer
gesteld, \<nog of zijlieden\>[^8] de Duijtschen vervolgd hadden.

Anders niet relateerende, geeft den relatant voor reedenen van
wetenschap als in den text, bereijd zijnde het vorenstaande, des
gerequireerd werdende, nader te zullen gestand doen.

Aldus gerelateerd, en door de eerstgenoemde getuijgen uit de Maleijdze
taal vertolken, aan Stellenbosch, den 30^e^ Maij 1775, in ’t bijweesen
der burgers Johannes Victor en Johs. Jacobus Reiniers, als getuijgen ten
deesen gerequireerd.

Dit X merk is door den slaaf Maart eigenhandig gesteld.

Als getuijgen, \[get.\] Johs. Victor, J.J. Reiniers.

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] A. Faure, secretaris.

**1/STB 3/11** Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.

Huijden, den 14^e^ Junij 1775, compareerde voor mij, Abraham Faure,
secretaris van Stellenbosch en Drakenstein, present de nagenoemde
getuijgen, den Hottentot Jan, van competenten ouderdom, denwelke, ter
requisitie van de heer landdrost, Marthinus Adrianus Bergh, verklaarde
hoe waar is:

Dat den comparant, in huur zijnde bij den burger Johs. Erasmus Smit,
eenige tijd geleeden, wanneer den veldcorporaal Gerrit Smit aan gemelde
Johs. Er. Smit om den comparant had laten vragen, ten einde denselven
naar de sporen van eenige drossers, die bij hem gestolen hadden, te gaan
soeken; den comparant, ter ordre van zijne baas, sulx in ’t veld had
gedaan, als wanneer hij die sporen gevonden hebbende, vervolgens met
gemelde veldcorporaal en Gideon van Zijl, nevens den Bastaard Gerrit,
deselve was nagegaan; komende omtrend een droge rivier, alwaar vier
drossers in een bosch lagen, dewelke door den veldcorporaal uitgeroepen
en gesegd zijnde, dat zij zig gevangen geven zouden, ten voorschijn
quamen, met blote messen in hunne handen; terwijl den comparant (die
niets als een dunne lat bij zig had) sig naar de rivier spoede om een
bequame stok te soeken, dat den comparant een schoot horende losgaan,
zig omdraijende, alstoen gesien had dat voorseijde jongens agter Van
Zijl liepen, wanneer een derselven daarop door den veldcorporaal
doodgeschoten wierd, terwijl den comparant een stok opgedaan en daarmede
toegekomen was, waren de twee overige jongens met hunne blote messen
agter den veldcorporaal, dog weder omgekeerd zijnde, hadden zij
vervolgens de vlugt genomen over meergemelde rivier, alwaar den
veldcorporaal nog een, die op hem inquam, heeft doodgeschoten; terwijl
den anderen zig gevangen quam over te geven.

Anders niet verklarende, geeft de comparant voor reedenen van wetenschap
als in den text, bereijd zijnde het vorenstaande, des vereijscht
werdende, nader te zullen gestand doen.

Dat aldus passeerde ter secretarije aan Stellenbosch, in ’t bijweesen
van den bode Morits Herman Otto Woeke en den coster Johannes Jacobus
Reiniers, als getuijgen.

Dit merk X is door den Hottentot Jan eigenhandig gesteld.

Als getuijgen, \[get.\] M.H.O. Woeke, J.J. Reiniers.

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] A. Faure, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement given on the requisition of the honourable landdrost,
Marthinus Adrianus Bergh, by the *veldcorporaal* Gerrit Smit, of
competent age, being of the following contents, namely:

That on Tuesday, the 2^nd^ of this month, when the testifier discovered
in the morning that the mill on his farm, the Drogerijscloof, situated
behind Piketberg, had been broken into during the night, and that two
*mudden* flour had been spilled on the floor and that both bags with
some flour had been taken away, the testifier and the burgher Gideon van
Zijl Pz., who was outspanning at his place, together with a Hottentot
named Jan, searched around on his farm and when they discovered some
traces of barefooted people,[^9] he and the said Van Zijl, each armed
with a loaded gun, followed the said traces, together with the said
Hottentot Jan and a certain Bastaard named Gerrit, the last mentioned of
which only had a *kirrij* with him. When they, about half an hour from
the farm of the testifier, saw some clothes lying by the bushes next to
the river and, coming closer, discovered four *jongens* who were lying
there in the bushes, the testifier instantly called out to them that
they should come out, whereupon they proceeded to stand in a row before
the bushes, with one of them having an unsheathed cutlass in the one
hand and a knife in the other, and similarly one of the other two
unsheathed knives, and both the others each holding one of the same in
the hand. Hereupon the testifier repeatedly called to them that they
should throw down their knives and should come to him one by one, upon
which the said four *jongens* spoke in Malay, which the testifier could
not understand, and who told them in Portuguese yet again that they
should throw down their knives and should come to him. They then,
without however getting rid of their knives and cutlass, rushed towards
to the testifier, who thereupon told them to stay back, repeating that
they should first throw down their knives, whereupon they stood still,
while the testifier again repeated what he said before and threatened to
shoot at them if they would not throw down their knives. As they still
did not do so, the testifier then told the aforementioned Van Zijl that
he should just as well shoot one of these slaves in the legs as a result
of which they would no doubt give themselves up as prisoners. Which was
done by the said Van Zijl but when the shot *jongen* fell down to the
ground, the other three came running with their knives, shouting: “Amok!
Amok! Matta Garra!”,[^10] towards the said Van Zijl who, as his gun
was not loaded, then took flight, while the testifier then hit one of
these deserters, who was closest behind Van Zijl, with a shot from his
gun in such a way that the same instantly fell down dead to the ground,
while the remaining two then ran to the testifier (who had not yet
loaded his gun), and followed him for approximately 150 paces, after
which they again went back to their previous place in the bushes. In the
meantime, the testifier and Van Zijl loaded their guns and followed the
said two *jongens*, when the said Van Zijl shot at one of them but did
not hit him, whereupon the testifier shot the same one – who did not
want to throw down his knife and, while shouting: “Bie, bie”,[^11]
stormed towards him, while the testifier again retreated and again
called to him to throw down his knife and to give himself up as prisoner
– with a bullet through his body, in such a way that he immediately fell
down, and when the same again tried, in vain, to lift himself up, he
died at once with the knife in his hand. After which the fourth of them,
on the order of the testifier, then threw down his knife and gave
himself up as prisoner. The testifier also found in the aforesaid bush
half a *mud* of the flour that they had stolen the previous night, and
understood from the latter that they were bondsmen of the
*fabriek*[^12] at the Cape of Good Hope.

There being nothing further to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the certainty of the statement as given in the text, being
willing, if so required, to subsequently confirm the above with solemn
oaths.

Thus recorded in the office of the secretary in Stellenbosch on 8 May
1775, in the presence of the messenger of the court Morits Herman Otto
Woeke and the burgher Johannes Engel, as witnesses.

\[signed\] Gerret Smiet \[*sic*\].

As witnesses, \[signed\] M.H.O. Woeke, J. Engel.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Faure, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Statement given, on the requisition of the honourable landdrost,
Marthinus Adrianus Bergh, by the slave Maart van Bencoule, of competent
age, belonging to the *fabricq*, *Monsieur* Marthinus van Oorden, being
of the following contents, namely:

That some time after the testifier had run away with three of his fellow
slaves by the name of Pallas, Julij and Kuijper from their owner in the
Cape, having been enticed thereto by the slave Pallas, and taking with
them six knives and a cutlass; they went to a certain mountain, which
the testifier cannot name, and when they were sleeping there, they were
roused by four people, consisting of two Dutchmen[^13] who had guns
with them, and two Hottentots armed with *assegaaijen*. Whereupon they
each got up, holding a knife in their hand, but, while the testifier was
still rubbing his eyes, he was hit with a shot in his leg so that he
immediately fell down, without being able to tell whether the other
slaves had defended themselves nor if they had chased the Dutchmen.

There being nothing further to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the certainty of the statement as given in the text, being
willing, if so required, to subsequently confirm the above.

Thus recorded, and interpreted from Malay by the first mentioned
testifier, in Stellenbosch on 30 May 1775, in the presence of the
burghers Johannes Victor and Johs. Jacobus Reiniers, requested as
witnesses hereto.

This X mark was set down by the slave Maart with his own hand.

As witnesses, \[signed\] Johs. Victor, J.J. Reiniers.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Faure, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Today, 14 June 1775, there appears before me, Abraham Faure, secretary
of Stellenbosch and Drakenstein, in the presence of the witnesses named
below, the Hottentot Jan, of competent age, who, on the requisition of
the honourable landdrost, Marthinus Adrianus Bergh, declares it to be
true:

That the deponent is hired by the burgher Johs. Erasmus Smit and that
some time ago, the *veldcorporaal* Gerrit Smit had asked the said Johs.
Er. Smit for the deponent in order to search for the tracks of some
deserters who had stolen from him. The deponent then, on the order of
his *baas*, did this in the veld and, when he found the tracks, he
followed them with the said *veldcorporaal* and Gideon van Zijl, as well
as the *Bastaard* Gerrit, until they got in the vicinity of a dry river
where four deserters were lying in the bushes, who, when they were
called by the the *veldcorporaal* and told that they should give
themselves up as prisoners, came forward with unsheathed knives in their
hands, when the deponent (who did not have anything with him but a thin
cane) sped to the river in order to find a suitable stick. When the
deponent heard a shot going off, turned around and saw that the
aforesaid *jongens* were running after Van Zijl, when one of them was
thereupon shot dead by the *veldcorporaal*, while the deponent picked up
a stick and came forwards with it. The two remaining *jongens* chased
after the *veldcorporaal* with their unsheathed knives, but turned
around and then took flight across the aforementioned river, which is
where the *veldcorporaal* shot dead another one who ran towards him,
while the other one eventually gave himself up.

There being nothing further to relate, the deponent asserts to be
convinced of the certainty of his statement as given in the text, being
willing, if so required, to subsequently confirm the above.

Thus recorded at the secretary’s office in Stellenbosch in the presence
of the messenger of the court Morits Herman Otto Woeke and the beadle
Johannes Jacobus Reiniers, as witnesses.

This mark X was set down by the Hottentot Jan with his own hand.

As witnesses, \[signed\] M.H.O. Woeke, J.J. Reiniers.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Faure, secretary.

[^1]: * The case is mentioned in Penn 1999: 91. For discussion of the
    linguistic complexity of Cape slave society, see also 1763 Christina
    Strang and 1775 Moses van Bengalen.*

[^2]: * It is significant that while the farmer is capable of addressing
    them in Portuguese, he does not understand Malay. Although no
    detailed study of this has yet been done, it seems from the
    available evidence that Portuguese was more commonly used as a
    lingua franca amongst the slaves and that settlers were more likely
    to know this language than Malay (see, for example, the data in
    Franken 1953: 41-79). Although these slaves ignored the farmer’s
    questions, they undoubtedly knew some Portuguese, as is confirmed by
    their utterances, which are in both these languages. *

[^3]: * See 1744 Barkat van Timor for this phenomenon. As in *amok*
    cases, one of them wanted to commit suicide. *

[^4]: * Bencoule (present-day Bengkulu) on the western coast of Sumatra.
    The port was an English East India Company trading post from the
    late seventeenth century, although it was largely unsuccessful in
    tapping into the VOC-dominated trade in the East Indies and it faded
    into insignificance after the founding of Singapore in 1819.*

[^5]: * In addition to those transcribed here, the testimonies collected
    by the Stellenbsoch landdrost included those of Kuijper van
    Macassar, Gideon van Zijl and the *Bastaard-Hottentot* Gerrit Obie,
    1/STB 3/11, unpaginated. *

[^6]:  There is no record of the case in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 57.

[^7]:  On the meaning of this, see the discussion below, n. 10.

[^8]:  The phrase between angled brackets was crossed out. As it is, the
    last part of this sentence needs a linking word like *en* or *of*,
    so the erased phrase would make sense in the sentence.

[^9]:  On the significance of this, see 1746 Januarij van Boegies, n. 9.

[^10]:  This utterance, and the one which follows, not only illustrate
    how these slaves could communicate in both Malay and Portuguese, but
    also, as pointed out by den Besten, how often dialectical or
    substandard forms of an unknown language were misunderstood at the
    Cape: *Amok* is Malay for ‘attack’, *matta* is Creole Portuguese for
    ‘kill’, but *gara* poses a problem, as the form which Smit, who knew
    no Malay, heard and reported to the judicial authorities (who left
    us the only trace of it) is not known in either language. Den Besten
    suggests it is the Eastern Malay form of *gorok* (in which dialect
    the final consonant gets deleted), meaning ‘to slash somebody’s
    throat, to butcher’. This utterance can therefore be translated as:
    “Attack! Attack! Kill! Slash!” (Den Besten 2004: 89-90).

[^11]:  Creole Portuguese for “Come, come” (Den Besten 2004: 90).

[^12]:  It was common in the eighteenth century to refer to somebody by
    a shortened version of their job title. *Fabriek* probably refers in
    this way to the *fabriekmeester, *the head of the Company public
    works. Martinus van Oorden had arrived at the Cape in 1773 and was
    appointed supervisor for the building of the new Company hospital,
    in charge of 89 builders (VOC 5222, f. 65 and VOC 6576, f. 197). The
    slaves appear to have been his personal property, not the Company
    slaves who worked in the warehouses.

[^13]:  On the special meaning of this term, see 1739 Jurgen Scholts, n.
    8.
