1.  MOSES VAN DE CAAB

*As the majority of slaves during the eighteenth century were imported,
it meant that there were speakers of a wide range of languages at the
Cape. Since many came from South and Southeast Asia, where Creole
Portuguese and Malay were well entrenched as contact
languages,*^*[^1]*^* these languages were widely used at the Cape by the
second half of the century, especially (but not exclusively) amongst
slaves.*^*[^2]*^* Even so, the great variety of circumstances and
individuals at the Cape could easily lead to misunderstandings, as
illustrated in this case where an argument between two slaves on a
Stellenbosch farm was exacerbated by the problems they had understanding
each other’s language: Moses van de Caab was born in the colony, while
Januarij had been imported from India and spoke no Dutch and only a
little Portuguese, presumably the only languages Moses could
speak.*^*[^3]*^* The wide variety of regions from which slaves were
brought to the Cape was also one factor which inhibited the development
of a distinctive slave culture rooted in the area of origin.*^*[^4]*^* *

*Januarij subsequently died of his wound, and the case was sent to the
Council of Justice, where Moses van de Caab was charged with ‘wrathfully
throwing a knife’ and causing Januarij’s death. He was sentenced to 25
years on the public works at Robben Island.*^*[^5]*^* *

**1/STB** **3/11** Criminele Verklaringen, 1759-1782, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeven ter requisitie van den heer landdrost, Marthinus Adrianus
Bergh, door den slaaf October van de Caab, van competenten ouderdom,
toebehoorende de burgeresse Anna Hasselaar, weduwe wijlen den burger
Christoffel Groenewald, zijnde van den volgende inhoud, namentlijk:

Dat wanneer den relatant en de mede slaven Slammat, Fortuijn, Salomon,
Moses en Januarij, voor eenige dagen,^[^6]^ des voormiddags, ter hunner
lijfvrouws plaats, met de ossewagen beesig waren om druijven te rijden,
en ten dien einde bij de aldaar staande wijngaard, de mosdruijven
beladene wagen in te spannen, hij relatant, gelijk ook den slaaf Moses,
ieder een paar ossen onder ’t inspannen aan de hand hadden, zij beijde
met elkander woorden hadden gekregen; zeggende den relatant tegens Moses
dat hij de beesten uit den weg zoude trekken, dat deselve hem schoppen
zouden, en gemelde Moses g’antwoord hebbende: Dat kan ik niet doen,
denselven voorts den mede slaaf Januarij, die na gissing omtrent ses
treeden ter zijde agter hem stond, met deese woorden toegeroepen
hebbende: (s.v.) Moern...^[^7]^, jaag de ossen aan, dan wijl gedagte
Januarij (als zeer dom zijnde, en geen Duijtsch, maar wijnig Portugees,
verstaat) sulx niet gaauw genoeg kwam te doen, had hij Moses een mes met
de scheede uit zijn broeksak gehaald en hetselve, met de scheede, bij de
punt gevat hebbende, alstoen dat mes met de scheede zodanig naar gedagte
Januarij geworpen dat hetselve uit de scheede gevlogen en hem Januarij
dermaten in het been getroffen had, dat hij Januarij aanstonds daarop
ter aarde was komende vallen, terwijl denselven aan zijn been zeer sterk
gebloed had, waarop gerepte Moses zijn doek van ’t hoofd genomen en
zijlieden, zo goed zij konden, de wonde daar mede verbonden hebbende,
meergemelde Januarij op voormelde wagen geset en naar ’t huijs van hunne
lijfvrouw gebragt hadden.

Anders niet relateerende, geeft den relatant voor reedenen van
wetenschap als in den text, bereijd zijnde het vorenstaande, des
vereijscht werdende, nader te zullen gestand doen.

Aldus gerelateerd ter secretarije aan Stellenbosch, den 10^e^ Maart
1775, in ’t bijweesen van de bode Morits Herman Otto Woeke en de burger
Johannes Engel, als getuijgen.

Dit X merk is door den slaaf October eijgenhandig gesteld.

Als getuijgen, \[get.\] M.H.O. Woeke, J. Engel.

In kennisse van mij, \[get.\] A. Faure, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement given on the requisition of the honourable landdrost,
Marthinus Adrianus Bergh, by the slave October van de Caab, of competent
age, belonging to the burgher Anna Hesselaar, widow of the late burgher
Christoffel Groenewald, which is of the following content, namely:

That one afternoon on his owner’s farm when he, the testifier, and his
fellow slaves, Slammat, Fortuijn, Salomon, Moses and Januarij, had been
busy for some days transporting grapes with the ox-wagon, and to this
end were spanning in the wagon, loaded with young grapes, at the
vineyard there, the testifier, as also the slave Moses, who each, while
doing the inspanning, had a pair of oxen on their hands, both started an
altercation with each other, when the testifier said to Moses that he
should move the cattle out of the way lest they kick him, and the said
Moses answered: “I cannot do that”. He then called out to his fellow
slave Januarij, who was standing approximately six steps to the side
behind him, with these words (by your leave): “Motherfucker, drive the
oxen forward”; then, when the said Januarij (since being rather stupid,
and understanding no Dutch but a little Portuguese) did not manage to do
this quickly enough, Moses drew a knife with its sheath from the pocket
of his trousers and took it with its sheath by the point and then threw
that knife with its sheath in such a way at the said Januarij that it
flew out of its sheath and hit him, Januarij, in his leg in such a
manner that he immediately fell to the ground, bleeding heavily from his
leg. Whereupon the said Moses took his kerchief from his head and, after
dressing the wounds with it as best they could, they put the
aforementioned Januarij on the aforesaid wagon and took him to the house
of their owner.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, being willing
to subsequently confirm the aforesaid, if so required.

Thus related at the office of the secretary at Stellenbosch on 10 March
1775 in the presence of the messenger of the court Morits Herman Otto
Woeke and the burgher Johannes Engel, as witnesses.

This mark X was made on his own by the slave October.

As witnesses, \[signed\] M.H.O. Woeke, J. Engel.

With my cognisance, \[signed\] A. Faure, secretary.

[^1]: * For the use of Creole Portuguese and Malay as contact languages
    in these regions, see Groeneboer 1993: 16-28, 45-7, 92-3. *

[^2]: * Slaves spoke their own mother tongues to other fellow speakers
    where they had contact with them (such as Bugis, which seems to have
    been quite widespread in the second half of the eighteenth century,
    Davids 1994: 46-7), but since slaves from a wide variety of
    linguistic backgrounds were usually together on a farm or in a
    household, they often had to resort to a lingua franca. The language
    used changed over time in accordance with variations in the regions
    from which slaves were imported. Thus it seems unlikely that Creole
    Portuguese was used as a general contact language at the Cape before
    about 1700, and Malay probably only from some decades later
    (Groenewald 2002: 92-3 and 213-16). On Creole Portuguese and Malay
    at the Cape, see Den Besten 1997: 330-43 and 2000: 953-59; Franken
    1953: 41-79; and Ponelis 1993: 14-17. For knowledge of these contact
    languages (or lack of it) amongst the burgher population, see the
    discussion in 1763 Christina Strang, n. 12.*

[^3]: * Januarij is described as ‘van Bengalen’ in the surgeon’s report,
    CJ 409, vol. 4, f. 242 \[modern pagination\]. Moses may well have
    understood some Creole Portuguese or Malay, but not the indigenous
    Asian language spoken by Januarij.*

[^4]: * This is not to say that slaves did not possess any cultural
    identity, but rather that it was formed at the Cape with an
    admixture of local and Indian Ocean roots. On language and slave
    culture at the Cape, see Ross 1983: 14-15 and Worden 1985: 94-5. *

[^5]: * ‘grammoedige werping met een mes naar desselfs meede slaaf
    Januarij, mitsgaders daardoor veroorsaakte quetsing en opgevolgde
    neederslag’ (wrathfully throwing a knife at his fellow slave
    Januarij, and also the wounding caused by it and the resulting
    collapse). Moses claimed that it was an accident, CJ 409, f. 247
    \[modern pagination\]. The full sentence was a public whipping and
    25 years on Robben Island, with costs, CJ 57, ff. 39-40. The
    *eijsch* had recommended a life sentence on Robben Island, which
    probably came to much the same thing, CJ 409, f. 225 \[modern
    pagination\]. In addition to the testimony of October given here,
    the full documentation for the case includes the *sententie* (CJ
    793, ff. 240-48)*,* the *eijsch* and the testimonies of Slammat van
    Boegies, Solomon van de Caab, Fortuijn van Bengalen, the surgeon’s
    report on the body of Januarij van Bengalen, as well as the
    interrogation of Moses, CJ 409, vol. 4, ff. 215-51 \[modern
    pagination\]. *

[^6]:  *Sic*. Seemingly a word such as *voorleeden* is omitted here.

[^7]:  This was a discreet way of writing *moerneuker* (literally
    ‘motherfucker’), hence the preceding abbreviation for *salva venia*,
    ‘by your leave’ or ‘with your permission’.
