# ONTONG VAN BOEGIES AND ADONIS VAN DE CAAB

*This case involved an argument between Ontong van Boegies and the
*knecht* who was in charge of the vine harvesting. The owner supported
the *knecht* fully, urging him to carry on beating Ontong. Ontong played
for time by holding a knife to his own throat, but later threatened both
his owner and the *knecht* with it. *

*The case is typical of conflicts in the court records over the
authority of *knechten*.[^1] But it is also interesting for the
actions of Ontong’s fellow slave, Adonis van de Caab. He attempted to
use this episode to his own advantage, by changing his original evidence
of what happened and by telling the authorities that Ontong was innocent
and the fault lay with the *knecht* and their owner. Under
cross-examination he confessed that he did this to spite his owner, and
it was revealed that he had made plans to escape. Adonis was punished by
the landdrost, rather than by the Council of Justice, but the case shows
how slaves could try to use the legal system of the Company to their own
advantage against their owners.*[^2]

**CJ 2487** Inkoomende Brieven, 1776-1780, Deel 3, f. 125.

Weledelachtbare heer!

Gisteren heeft den Drakenstijnsen burger Johannes Nieuwout, alhier in
hegtenis overgeleverd, desselfs slave jongen, genaamt Ontong van
Boegies, denwelken, in den wijngaard met den druijflees bezig zijnde en
door den, bij gemelde Nieuwout wonende, meede burger Pieter Engelbregt
over eenig verzuim gereprimandeert werdende, zig tegens gedagte
Engelbregt, en vervolgens tegens zijn lijfheer, op eene verregaande
wijse met ’t mes heeft geopposeerdt. Van ’tzelve heb ik d’ eer u
weledelachtbare bij dezen plichtschuldig rapport te doen; werdende
gedagte slave jongen na de Caab in hegtenis getransporteerd, om
eerstdaags tegens denzelven de nodige enquesten in fama te kunnen
beleggen; terwijl met verschuldigde hoogachting ben,

Weledelachtbare heer!

U weledelachtbarens onderdanigen dienaar, \[get.\] O.G. de Wet.

Stellenbosch, den 12^e^ Maart 1779.

**CJ 413** Criminele Process Stukken, 1779, deel 2, ff. 315-19.

Compareerde voor ons, ondergetekende gecommitteerdens uijt den
edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie deeses gouvernements, den slaven jongen
Adonis van de Caab, toebehorende den burger Jan Nieuwout, van
competenten ouderdom, denwelken, ter requisitie van den onderkoopman en
landdrost van Stellenbosch, d’edele Olof Godlieb de Wet, verklaarde hoe
waar is:

Dat den comparant op zeekeren Donderdag, ’s morgens, nu omtrent
veerthien dagen voorleden, zonder in den positiven tijd bepaald te
willen zijn, met zijn mede slaaf, Ontong van Boegies, en den knegt van
gemelde zijn leijfheer, in name Pieter Engelbregt, in den wijngaard met
druijven te snijden beesig geweest zijnde, gemelde Ontong alsdoen, die
eenige treeden van henlieden af was, gemelde Engelbregt had gevraagt of
hij Ontong ook snijden moest, en wanneer gemelde Engelbregt daarop was
komen te antwoorden dat hij maar dragen moest, en dat hij Engelbregt
desselfs reij wel afsneijden zoude, had dien jongen meergemelde
Engelbregt opstonds voor een moervreeter en hoerekind uijtgescholden,
met bijgevoegde vrage of hij Engelbregt ook iets te commandeeren had,
met bijvoeging: Komt slaat mij eens!, zulx gemelde Engelbregt een stuk
brandhout genomen en dien jongen eenige slagen daarmede gegeven had;
hebbende intusschen ’s comparants voorseijde leijfheer gemelde
Engelbregt toegeroepen: Toe raakt wat!, als wanneer gemelde Engelbregt
dien jongen nog eenige slagen gegeven had, intusschen dat gemelde Ontong
met zijn arm, waarin een boslemmermes hield, eenige beweeging op gemelde
Engelbregt maakte, dog dat gemelde Engelbregt dien jongen met ’t stuk
hout een slag op desselfs arm toegebragt hebbende, hetzelve op de grond
had laten vallen, terwijl voormelde Ontong, zo als met d’ andere hand,
’t mes wederom had willen optellen, wederom een slag op desselfs rug
bekomen, en daardoor op de grond gevallen was.

Dat ’s comparants gemelde leijfheer, die intusschen daar bij gekomen
was, dien jongen bekeeven hebbende, onder ’t zeggen: Oude rakker!,
waarom luijstert gij niet?, gemelde Ontong opstonds zijn mes aan zijne
keel geset en tot zijn leijfheer gesegt had: Toe moerneuker!, slaat mij
eens!

Dat so als des comparants leijfheer wederom terug naar huijs quam te
gaan, gemelde Ontong met een draagstok en ’t mes in zijne hand hem
eenige treeden agteraan gegaan, egter immediaat wederom terug naar
gemelde Engelbregt en hem comparant gekomen was; zulx meergemelde
Engelbregt en hij comparant uijt vreese, dat door dien jongen mogten
werden g’attaqueert, wat agteruijt gelopen zijnde, zijlieden egter, op
’t ontwaren dat dien jonge, naar henlieden eenige treeden agtervolgt te
hebben, staan bleef, mede staan gebleven waren; als wanneer gemelde
Ontong, onder geduurig schelden en onder het stukkent snijden van eenige
wijnstokken met zijn mes, henlieden had toegeroepen: Komt nu hier!, dog
dat kort daarop gemelde Ontong zijne twee manden met druijven genomen en
naar den kelder gebragt had; alwaar denselven dan ook, volgens horen
zeggen, door den burger Arij Visagie vast gemaakt en naar Stellenbosch
getransporteert geworden was.

Niets meer verklarende, geeft den comparant voor redenen van weetenschap
als in den text, en betuijgde voorts, ter presentie van den slaaf Ontong
van Boegies, al het voorenstaande de suijvere waarheijd te zijn.

Aldus gedaan ende gerecolleert in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop, den 29^e^
Maart 1779, voor d’ edele Lodewijk Christoph Warneck en Christiaan
George Maasdorp, leden uijt den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie,
voornoemd, die de minute deeses, beneevens den comparant ende mij,
geswooren clercq, mede behoorlijk hebben ondertekent.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] C.L. Kloege, geswoore clercq.

**CJ 794** Sententiën, 1777-1781, ff. 161-70.

Nademaal Ontong van Boegies, slaaf van den landbouwer Johannes Nieuwout,
oud na gissing vijftig jaaren, thans ’s heeren gevangen, vrijwillig
beleeden heeft, en den edelagtbaare Raad van Justitie, uijt de verdere,
ten processe gevoegde, stucken, sonneklaar gebleeken is:

Dat wanneer den gevangen, die bescheijden geweest is op zijn lijfheer,
in ’t district van Drakensteijn geleegen, in de Salomons Valleij
genoemden plaats, zig omtrent het midden van de maand Maart
jongstleeden, of in de perstijd, op een Donderdagmorgen, beneevens den,
als knegt bij des gevangens lijfheer woonenden, burger Pieter
Engelbregt, mitsgaders den meede slaaf Adonis, in den wijngaard had
bevonden, en voorseijde Engelbregt, op des gevangens vrage, of hij
gevangen ook druijven snijden moest, aan den gevangen, die toen in
dieselve reij wijngaardstocken, omtrend twintig treeden van hem af
geweest was, tot antwoord gegeeven had, dat hij gev. de druijven maar na
den kelder dragen moest, dewijl hij Engelbregt die reij zelfs wel
afsnijden zoude. Den gevangen voorseijde Engelbregt opstonds voor een
moervreeter en hoerekind gescholden en gevraagt had of hij Engelbrecht
ook iets had te commandeeren, teffens daarbij gevoegt hebbende: Komt
slaat mij eens!

Dat voorseijde Engelbregt mitsdien een stuk brandhout opgenomen, zig na
den gevangen begeeven en denselven, over zijne brutaliteijd, daarmeede
twee à drie slagen toegebragt hebbende; des gevangens lijfheer, die
vanuijt zijn woonhuijs had ontwaard en gehoord dat den gevangen tegens
meergemelde Engelbregt met scheldwoorden te keer ging, overzulks na den
wijnberg gegaan was, en voorseijde Engelbregt van verre toegeroepen had:
Toe raakt wat!, zulks meergemelde Engelbregt, den gevangen nog eenige
slagen had gegeeven; dan ontwaard hebbende dat den gevangen met zijnen
arm, in welkers hand denselven een boslemmermes hield, eene klijne
beweeging quam te maken, had gemelde Engelbregt den gevangen opstonds
een slag op dien arm toegebragt, met dat effect dat daar door het mes
uijt des gevangens hand en op de aarde was gevallen, mitsgaders soo als
den gevangen poogde hetzelve met de andere hand weeder op te neemen,
denselven een tweede slag op den rugge gegeeven had, dermaaten dat den
gevangen op de aarde needergevallen was; hebbende des gevangens
lijfheer, die ondertusschen nader bij gekomen was, den gevangen over
zijne assurantie en bedrijf bekeeven; en voorseijde Engelbregt des
gevangens lijfheer voorts verwittigt dat den gevangen een mes in handen
had.

Dat den gevangen alsdoen, onder het uijtten van een, teegens zijn
lijfheer gerigt, seer vilain scheldwoord, en ’t herhaalde zeggen: Kijk,
wilt gij ’t eens zien?, het mes met het scherp, tegens zijn gevangens
keel geset hebbende, des gevangens lijfheer, vermits niets in handen
hadde, zig dierhalven zagtjes van den gevangen had geretireert, dewijl
vermeijnde dat den gevangen hem zelfs te kort doen zoude; dog dat den
gevangen, in steede van dien, zijn voorseijde lijfheer, met een
draagstok en ’t mes in handen, eenige treeden agteraangevolgt, dog kort
daarop stil gestaan had, zig omgekeert en weeder na voorseijde
Engelbregt en Adonis gekeert was, zulks dezelve hun iets agterwaards
begeeven hadden, uijt vreese dat den gevangen hun, met het in handen
houdenden mes, aanvallen mogte.

Dat den gevangen, middelerwijl dat desselfs lijfheer zig na huijs
begeeven had, stil gestaan en, onder gestadig schelden, uijt boosheijd
de rondsom \[*sic*\] hem staande wijngaardstocken, met zijn mes stuckend
gesneeden, mitsgaders teffens bij herhaalinge geroepen hebbende: Komt nu
hier! Den gevangen egter vervolgens bedaard was, zijne twee manden met
druijven opgenoomen en dezelve na den kelder gebragt had; alwaar den
gevangen, op versoek van zijn lijfheer, door den, zig juist bij hem
bevondenen, burger Arij Visage, dewelke zig ten dien eijnde vanuijt het
woonhuijs, na den kelder had begeeven, onder ’t neederzetten der manden,
op ’t onverwagtst, het mes behendiglijk uijt zijn broekzak gerukt, en
elders heen geworpen zijnde; hij gevangen aan voorseijde Visage gevraagt
had waarom denselven zijn gevangens mes weggooijde, op ’twelke
meergemelde Visage, den gevangen insgelijx vragenderwijse, toegevoegt
hebbende waarom den gevangen zijn lijfheer daarmeede gedreijgt had, den
gevangen daarop, in zijne quaadheijd, wel iets had gezegt, ’tgeen door
gemelde Visage egter niet verstaan was; des meergemelde Visage, den
gevangen opstonds vastgehouden en vanuijt den kelder bij zijn lijfheer
in huijs gebragt had, alwaar denselven vastgemaakt, na Stellenbosch
gestransporteerd, en dus in handen van justitie overgeleevert geworden
was.

Maar nademaal diergelijke gedoente, in een land alwaar regt ende
geregtigheijd gehandhaaft word, geensins ongestraft gelaaten werden kan,
maar andere zulke fielten, ten voorbeelde en afschrik, na bevinding van
zaken gepunieert werden moet.

Soo is ’t, dat den edelachtbaare Raad van Justitie, voormeld, ten dage
dienende, met nadruk geleesen en overwogen hebbende, den schriftelijken
crimineelen eijsch en conclusie, door den landdrost van Stellenbosch en
Drakensteijn, d’ edele Olof Godlieb de Wet, *nomine officii*, op ende
jeegens den gevangen gedaan en genoomen, mitsgaders geleth op des
gevangens vrijwillige confessie, zoo wel als op ’tgeene ter zaake verder
dienende was en haar edelagtbaarens konde moveeren, regt doende uijt
naame ende van wegens de hoogmoogende Heeren Staaten Generaal der
Vereenigde Neederlanden, den gevangen Ontong van Boegies hebben
gecondemneert, gelijk haar edelagtbaarens denzelven condemneeren mits
deezen: omme ter ordinaire justitie plaats gebragt te werden, aldaar den
scherpregter overgeleevert, met de strop om de hals onder de galg ten
pronk gesteld, voorts aan een paal gebonden, met roeden op de bloote
rugge strengelijk gegeeselt, daarop gebrandmerkt en vervolgens in de
ketting geklonken zijnde, daarin den tijd zijn ’s leevens op Robben
Eijland aan ’s edele Compagnies gemeene werken te arbeijden; met
condemnatie in de kosten en misen van justitie; en ontzegging van den
anders gedaanen eijsch van den Officier.

Aldus gedaan en gesententieerd in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop den 6^e^ Maij
1779, mitsgaders gepronuntieerd ende geëxecuteerd den 15^e^
daaraanvolgende.

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] Jm. van Plettenberg.

\[get.\] P. Hacker, A. van Schoor, L.C. Warneck, T.C. Rönnekamp, P.L. le
Suëur, Gs. Hk. Cruijwagen, S. v. Echten, C.G. Maasdorp, G.H. Meijer.

Mij present, \[get.\] C.L. Neethling, secretaris.

**CJ 2487** Inkoomende Brieven, 1776-1780, Deel 3, ff. 128-29.

Weledelachtbare heer!

Den slave jongen Adonis van de Caab, toebehoorende den burger Johannes
Nieuwout, zig op dit ogenblik bij mij hebbende vervoegt en te kennen
gegeven, dat hij omtrent zijn gegeven verklaring in de zaak tegens
Ontong van Boegies, meede slaaf van gemelde Nieuwout voor den
edelachtbaare Rade van Justitie hangende, niet ter goeder trouwe was te
werk gegaan, als hebbende, uit vrees voor zijn lijfheer, de verklaring
zodanig verleend, als hem zijn lijfheer opgegeven had; zeggende nader,
dat den gevangen op zijn lijfheer niet gescholden heeft, nog hem met ’t
mes agteraan is gevolgd, maar dat den gevangen wel ’t mes tegens de keel
gezet en zijn lijfheer gedreigd heeft zigzelfs de keel af te snijden;
onder betuiging wijders, dat den gevangen door den knegt Engelbregt ten
onregten was geslagen geworden met een stok die hij meede bragt en mij
vertoonde; achte ik ’t van mijn plicht u weledelachtbare hiervan
provisioneel ten spoedigsten kennisse te geven; terwijl ik, om nader
ligt in de zaak te bekomen, voornoemde Nieuwout bij mij ontbaden heb, en
van ’tgeend bij ’t compareeren van denzelven kome te ontdekken, u
weledelachtbare nader verslag zal doen.

Middelerwijl d’ eer hebbende met schuldige eerbied te zijn,

Weledelachtbare heer!

U Weledelachtbarens ootmoedigen en gehoorzamen dienaar, \[get.\] O.G. de
Wet.

Stellenbosch, d’ 6^e^ Maij 1779.

**CJ 2487** Inkoomende Brieven, 1776-1780, Deel 3, ff. 130-32.

Weledelachtbare heer!

Omtrent het te kennen geven van den slaaf Adonis van de Caab,
toebehorende den burger Johannes Nieuwout, dat hij zijn verklaring in de
zaak van den meede slaaf Ontong van Boegies zoude hebben verleend met
afwijking van de waarheid, gelijk bij mijne vorige d’ eer heb gehad u
weledelachtbare provisioneel te berigten, moet ik u weledelachtbare
thans nader rapporteren, dat denzelven Adonis, heden gehoord zijnde in
tegenwoordigheid van zijn lijfheer, halstarrig bij zijn voorseijde
gezegde is blijven persisteren. Dog, nadat hij door zijn lijfheer een en
andermaal gedrongen was geworden om te zeggen wat reden hem Adonis tot
zulk een leugentaal had gebragt, en of hij niet al van hem genoot dat
een slaaf van zijn lijfheer te genooten had, konde denzelven, op ’t
eerste zwijgende, tegens ’t laaste niets inbrengen; maar voerde hij zijn
lijfheer in deeze woorden te gemoed: Maar waarom is baas mij dan zo
tegen geweest met de mijd? Op ’twelke Nieuwout verhaalde dat gemelde
Adonis zig ingelaten hebbende met eene zogenaamde Bosjesmans
Hottentottin, bij hem woonachtig, hij, om de ondeugd van deeze
Hottentottin (die hij voornemens was, tot voorkoming van verder bederf
onder zijne slaven, te laten gaan) denzelven Adonis daarin had
verhinderd. Waaruit dan blijkt dat deezen jongen hierover met een
wraaktlust tegen zijn lijfheer bezielt geraakt zijnde, ’t sinister
practijcq heeft gebruikt om zijn lijfheer te betigtigen dat denzelven
hem tot het verlenen van een valsche verklaring had gepersuadeert. Dit
kan nader worden afgenomen uit ’t verzoek, door hem Adonis bij mij
gedaan, om van zijn lijfheer ontslagen te mogen worden, met bijvoeging
dat hij dog geen goed bij denzelven zoude doen, en in welk verzoek hij
zig zekerlijk verbeeld heeft niet te zullen missen, als hebbende,
behalven eenig geld en dubbele klederen, waarvan hij hem had voorzien,
nog tusschen dit en de Paarl, volgens zijn eigen bekentenis, verborgen
gelaten: een assegaij, een viool, nevens eenige klederen en
klijnigheden. Het gezegde word ten overvloede geprobeert wanneer men de
contradictie in de zaak zelve betragt, om hem Nieuwout namentlijk te
supponeren zig zelven zo verre te hebben vergeten, dat hij, ter
bevorderinge van zijn eigen schade en ontegensprakelijk verlies als ’t
gemis van den slaaf Ontong meede brengt, zig zoude bezoedelen met het
verlenen van een valsch relaas, strokende met de depositie van voormelde
Adonis en het beëedigen van dien, waardoor dus, gelijk hij zig
uitdrukte, onschuldig bloed zoude werden gebragt op hem en zijne
kinderen. Om welke redenen dan ook verzoeke dat u weledelachtbare op ’t
een en andere reguard nemende, gelieve te permitteren dat, ingevolge ’t
supplicq van gedagte Nieuwout, om zijne verdere schade en veelvuldige
oncosten te vermijden, meergemelde Adonis alhier ter drostdije domesticq
worde afgestraft en aan zijn lijfheer terug geleverd. Terwijl d’eer heb,
met alle hoogachting, te zijn,

Weledelachtbare heer!

U weledelachtbarens ootmoedigen en gehoorzamen dienaar, \[get.\] O.G. de
Wet.

Stellenbosch, den 8^e^ Maij 1779.

TRANSLATION

Most honourable Lord!

Yesterday, Johannes Nieuwout, a burgher from Drakenstein, delivered into
custody here his *jongen* named Ontong van Boegies, who, while he was
busy in the vineyard gathering grapes and was being reprimanded by the
fellow burgher, Pieter Engelbregt, who lives with the said Nieuwout,
over some neglect, in a most outrageous manner attacked first the said
Engelbregt and then his owner with a knife. Bound by duty, I have with
this the honour to give a report of the same to your most honourable
Lord; the said slave *jongen* is being transported in custody to the
Cape so that I could soon conduct the necessary investigation concerning
the accusation against him; while I am with due respect,

Most honourable Lord!

Your most honourable Lord’s obedient servant, \[signed\] O.G. de Wet.

Stellenbosch, 12 March 1779.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned delegates, from the honourable
Council of Justice of this government, the slave *jongen* Adonis van de
Caab, belonging to the burgher Jan Nieuwout, of competent age, who, on
the requisition of the landdrost of Stellenbosch, the honourable
*onderkoopman* Olof Godlieb de Wet, declares it to be true:

That during the morning of a certain Thursday, about fourteen days ago
now, without wishing to hazard a guess about the precise date, when the
deponent was busy, together with his fellow slave Ontong van Boegies and
the *knecht* of his said owner, by the name of Pieter Engelbregt,
cutting grapes in the vineyard, the said Ontong, who was some paces away
from them, asked the said Engelbregt whether he, Ontong, too should be
cutting, and when Engelbregt answered to this that he should just
continue with the carrying and that he, Engelbregt, would finish cutting
the row, this *jongen* immediately cursed the aforementioned Engelbregt
for a *moervreeter*[^3] and a child of a whore, and then asked whether
Engelbregt, had anything else to order as well, while adding: “Come, try
and beat me!”, whereupon the said Engelbregt took up a piece of fire
wood and gave this *jongen* some blows with it; while in the meantime
the deponent’s aforesaid owner called to Engelbregt: “Go on, hit him!”,
which is when the aforementioned Engelbregt dealt the prisoner some more
blows. Meanwhile, the said Ontong made some movements with his arm, in
which he held a *boslemmer* knife,[^4] in the direction of the said
Engelbregt, but the said Engelbregt dealt this *jongen* a blow on his
arm with a piece of wood so that he let it drop on the ground, and when
the aforementioned Ontong again wanted to pick up the knife with his
other hand, he received another blow on his back and fell to the ground
as a result of it.

That the deponent’s owner, who in the meantime had got there,
reprimanded this *jongen* and when he said: “Old scoundrel! why do you
not listen?” the said Ontong suddenly put his knife to his \[own\]
throat, and said to his owner: “Come on, motherfucker! Try and beat me!”

That as the deponent’s owner returned to the house again, the said
Ontong went after him for some paces with a \[carrying\] pole[^5] and
a knife in his hand, but immediately returned to the said Engelbrecht
and the deponent, when Engelbregt and the deponent, from fear that they
might be attacked by this *jongen*, walked backwards some way, but when
they noticed that this *jongen*, after having followed them for some
paces, was standing still, they too stood still, which is when the said
Ontong, while continually cursing and while cutting to pieces some vines
with his knife, called to them: “Come here, now!”; but that, shortly
thereafter, the said Ontong picked up his two baskets with grapes and
took them to the cellar where the same was then also, so he was told,
tied up by the burgher Arij Visagie and transported to Stellenbosch.

There being nothing more to declare, the deponent asserts to be
convinced of the certainty of his statement as in the text, and declares
further, in the presence of the slave Ontong van Boegies, all of the
above to be the whole truth.

Thus done and verified in the Castle of Good Hope on 29 March 1779
before the honourables Lodewijk Christoph Warneck and Christiaan George
Maasdorp, members of the honourable Council of Justice, who have
properly signed the original of this, together with the deponent and me,
the sworn clerk.

Which I declare, \[signed\] C.L. Kloege, sworn clerk.

TRANSLATION

Since Ontong van Boegies, slave of the farmer Johannes Nieuwout, 50
years old at a guess, currently their honours’ prisoner, has voluntarily
confessed and, since from the other documents produced in the case, it
has appeared clear as daylight to the honourable Council of Justice:

That on a Thursday morning about the middle of the month March of this
year, or at the time of wine pressing, when the prisoner, who works on
his owner’s farm, called De Salomons Valleij, situated in the
Drakenstein district, was in the vineyard together with the burgher
Pieter Engelbregt, who lives as *knecht* with the prisoner’s owner, as
also his fellow slave Adonis, and asked if he too should cut grapes, he
was answered by the aforesaid Engelbregt, who was then in the same row
of vines about twenty paces from him, that he should rather carry the
grapes to the cellar, as he, Engelbregt, would himself cut that row. The
prisoner immediately cursed Engelbregt for a *moervreeter *and a child
of a whore and asked if Engelbregt had anything else to order as well,
at the same time adding: “Come, try and beat me!”

That at this, Engelbregt took up a piece of firewood and went to the
prisoner and dealt him, because of his insolence, two or three blows
with it. The prisoner’s owner, who had seen and heard from his house
that the prisoner was raging against the aforementioned Engelbregt with
swear words, therefore went to the vineyard and called from afar to
Engelbregt: “Go on, hit him!”, upon which the aforementioned Engelbregt
gave the prisoner some more blows and, noticing then that the prisoner
made a small movement with his arm, in which hand he was holding a
*boslemmer* knife, he at once gave the prisoner a blow on this arm with
the result that the knife fell from the prisoner’s hand onto the ground,
and moreover, when the prisoner tried to pick up the same again with his
other hand, he gave him a second blow on his back, in such a way that
the prisoner fell down to the ground. The prisoner’s owner, who had
meanwhile come closer, was reprimanding the prisoner for his insolence
and actions but was informed by the aforesaid Engelbregt that the
prisoner had a knife in his hands.

That the prisoner then, while uttering a most slanderous curse against
his owner, and saying continuously: “So, you want to get it?”, put the
knife with its sharp side against his, the prisoner’s, throat; and since
the prisoner’s owner had nothing in his hands, he consequently retreated
slowly from the prisoner, thinking that the prisoner would kill himself.
However, instead of this, the prisoner followed his aforesaid owner for
some paces with a pole and a knife in his hands, yet shortly thereupon
he stood still, turned around and returned again to the aforesaid
Engelbregt and Adonis, who had retreated somewhat out of fear that the
prisoner might attack them with the knife he was holding in his hands.

That meanwhile, while his owner was going to his house, the prisoner
stood still and, out of anger, while constantly cursing, cut to pieces
with his knife the branches of the vineyard surrounding him, while also
at the same time repeatedly shouting: “Come here, now!” However, after
the prisoner calmed down, he picked up his two baskets of grapes and
took them to the cellar where, at his owner’s request, the prisoner’s
knife was skilfully pulled from the pocket of his trousers while he was
putting down the baskets and thrown away by the burgher Arij Visage, who
just then was visiting his owner and had gone from the house to the
cellar for this purpose. The prisoner asked the aforesaid Visage why he
was throwing away his knife, to which Visage similarly replied with a
question, viz. why the prisoner had threatened his owner with it, to
which the prisoner, in his anger, said something, which, however, was
not understood by Visage. The aforementioned Visage immediately took
hold of the prisoner and brought him from the cellar to his owner in the
house, where he was tied up and transported to Stellenbosch and thus
delivered into the hands of justice.

But since doings like these can under no circumstances be left
unpunished in a country where law and justice are upheld, but should, as
an example and deterrent to other such scoundrels, be punished according
to circumstances.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, aforementioned,
serving today, having carefully read and considered the written
*crimineelen eijsh en conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against
the prisoner by the landdrost of Stellenbosch and Drakenstein, the
honourable Olof Godlieb de Wet, in his official capacity, as well as
having noted the prisoner’s voluntary confession and moreover everything
which further served the case and could have moved their honours,
practising justice in the name and on behalf of the high and mighty
Lords States General of the United Netherlands, having judged the
prisoner Ontong van Boegies, is sentencing him with this: to be taken to
the usual place of justice, there to be handed over to the executioner,
to be exposed with the rope around his neck under the gallows,
thereafter to be tied to a stake, to be severely scourged with rods on
his bare back, thereupon to be branded and then to be put into chains,
in which to labour his whole life on the honourable Company’s public
works on Robben Island, with sentencing to the costs and expenditures of
justice; and denying the otherwise drawn up *eijsch* of the
officer.[^6]

Thus done and sentenced in the Castle of Good Hope on 6 May 1779, as
also pronounced and executed on the 15^th^ thereupon.[^7]

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] Jm. van Plettenberg.

\[signed\] P. Hacker, A. van Schoor, L.C. Warneck, T.C. Rönnekamp, P.L.
le Suëur, Gs. Hk. Cruijwagen, S. v. Echten, C.G. Maasdorp, G.H. Meijer.

In my presence, \[signed\] C.L. Neethling, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Most honourable Lord!

The slave *jongen* Adonis van de Caab, belonging to the burgher Johannes
Nieuwout, came just this moment to me and informed me that he did not
act in good faith concerning the statement he gave in the case against
Ontong van Boegies, a fellow slave of the said Nieuwout, pending before
the honourable Council of Justice, as he, out of fear for his owner,
gave the statement in accordance with what his owner had instructed him;
saying subsequently that the prisoner did not abuse his owner, nor did
he chase after him with a knife, but that the prisoner did put the knife
against his own throat and threatened his owner with cutting his own
throat, while declaring further that the prisoner was unfairly beaten by
the *knecht* Engelbregt with a stick; which stick he had brought along
and showed me. I considered it my duty to provisionally inform your most
honourable instantly, while I have summoned the aforementioned Nieuwout
to me in order to shed further light on the matter; and I shall report
later to your most honourable of what I shall come to discover during
his appearance.

In the meantime, I have the honour to be with due respect,

Most honourable Lord!

Your most honourable’s humble and obedient servant, \[signed\] O.G. de
Wet.

Stellenbosch, 6 May 1779.

TRANSLATION

Most honourable Lord!

Concerning the information of the slave Adonis van de Caab, belonging to
the burgher Johannes Nieuwout, viz. that in his statement given in the
case of his fellow slave, Ontong van Boegies, he deviated from the
truth, as I had had the honour to provisionally report to your most
honourable in my previous \[letter\], I now have to report further to
your most honourable that the same Adonis, having been heard today in
the presence of his owner, stubbornly continues to persist with his
aforesaid. Yet, after he had been urged more than once by his owner to
say what had brought him to such lies, and if he did not enjoy
everything from him that a slave could enjoy from his owner; he kept
silent about the first, but could bring to the last nothing other than
to address his owner with these words: “Why was *baas* so against me
with the *meijd*?” Upon which Nieuwout told the story that the said
Adonis had got involved with a so-called *Bosjesmans-Hottentot* woman
residing on his farm, and that he had prevented the same Adonis from
doing so because of the vice of this Hottentot woman (whom he intended
to let go in order to prevent further corruption amongst his slaves).
From which it then appears that because of this, this *jongen* became
inflamed with vengeance against his owner, and had made use of this
underhand trick to accuse his owner of having persuaded him to give a
false statement. This can be further deduced from the request made to me
by Adonis, viz. to be released from his owner, while adding that he
would after all do no good there, and in which request he certainly
imagined himself not to be denied, since – apart from some money and a
double set of clothes he had supplied himself with – he had also,
according to his own admission, left hidden between here and Paarl an
*assegaaij*, a violin, as well as some clothes and trifles. This is
abundantly proved when one considers the contradiction in the case, viz.
to suppose that Nieuwout was so totally beyond himself that, in order to
advance his own damage and the undeniable loss which the absence of the
slave Ontong would have caused, he would have polluted himself by giving
a false statement, in accordance with the deposition of the
aforementioned Adonis, and doing it under oath, through which, as he
himself expresses it, he would have brought innocent blood on him and
his children.[^8] For which reason I then also request your most
honourable, taking into consideration all of this, to please allow, in
accordance with the supplication of the said Nieuwout and to prevent
further damage and manifold expences, the aforementioned Adonis to be
punished domestically here at the *drostdij* and to be returned to his
owner. While I have the honour to be, with all respect,

Most honourable Lord!

Your most honourable’s humble and obedient servant, \[signed\] O.G. de
Wet.

Stellenbosch, 8 May 1779.

[^1]: * For discussion of *knechten* and their role as slave overseers,
    see 1761 Johan Spring in ’t Veld, n. 1. In this case the *knecht*
    was a burgher and therefore a so-called *vrijknecht*, not the more
    usual *leenknecht* (on the difference, see De Wet 1981: 100-2; Shell
    1994: 12-13).*

[^2]: * Other testimonies included were those of Johannes Nieuwout,
    Pieter Engelbrecht and Arij Visagie, and the interrogation of Ontong
    van Boegies, CJ 413, ff. 297-329.*

[^3]:  This is probably a variation of the Dutch *moerneuker*,
    ‘motherfucker’, common at the Cape in both its Dutch and Portuguese
    forms (see 1761 Johan Spring in ’t Veld, n. 3).

[^4]:  A *boslemmermes* is described as a ‘hunting knife’ but at the
    Cape this knife – which had a short, usually curved, blade – was
    used especially for the harvesting of grapes. From the 1790s, with
    the re-establishment of the Hernhutt mission at Genadendal, it was
    produced there and became known in Afrikaans as a *Genadendalmes* or
    *herneutermes* (Scholtz 1965: 158; Boshoff & Nienaber 1967: 283;
    Balie 1988: 61-2).

[^5]:  These are called *pikolan* in both Malay and modern Indonesian
    and were used to carry baskets or buckets of water over the
    shoulders. The Afrikaans verb *piekel*, ‘to lug, carry’, originates
    from this (Boshoff & Nienaber 1967: 497).

[^6]:  The *eijsch* recommended death by hanging, CJ 413, vol. 1, f.
    295.

[^7]:  The case was first brought to the Council of Justice on 22 April
    1779. Ontong said he did not deserve punishment, and the case was
    held over for further consideration until 6 May when the sentence
    above was passed, CJ 61, ff. 22-3. However, Adonis’s change of
    testimony, received on the same day, probably delayed the execution,
    which only took place on 15 May.

[^8]:  An intriguing indication of the concept that the spilling of
    ‘innocent blood’ (including that of slaves) could bring misfortune
    not only to the perpetrator, but also to his descendants. It echoes
    Matthew 27:25, and may show how some Biblical injunctions were part
    of the mental world of Cape burghers.
