1786 JOB VAN MADAGASCAR ET AL.

*This case provides details of the ways in which a group of runaways
hiding out on Table Mountain were able to sustain themselves.[^1]
They had links with the runaway community at Hangklip,[^2] as well
as with slaves in Cape Town, who provided them with food and a hiding
place. They moved between the mountain and the town, raiding houses and
farms, and at one stage brought captured cattle to the mountain. That
such a network existed in the vicinity of the town as late as the 1780s
shows how tentative was the Company’s control over its slave population,
even in the heart of the colony.*[^3]

**CJ 795** Sententiën, 1782-1789, ff. 407-23.

Alsoo Job van Madagascar, lijfeijgen van de weduwe wijlen den manhafte
Jan Hendrik Ekkerd, oud na gissing 30 jaren, Moses van Bougies, slaaf
van den burger Jacobus Tesselaar, oud na gissing 40 jaren, Francies van
Mosambique, toebehorende den burger Simon van Blerck, oud na gissing 20
jaren, Jek van Madagascar, lijfeijgen van den burger adjudant, den
manhaften Francois de Necker, oud na gissing 22 jaren, Fortuijn van
Madagascar, slaaf van den burger Petrus Johannes Hiebner, oud na gissing
25 jaren, Caesar van Madagascar, toebehoorende den oud koopman, de heer
Johannes van Echten, oud na gissing 40 jaaren, en Brein van Ambon,
vrijgegeevene lijfeijgen, oud na gissing 50 jaren, thans ’s heeren
gevangens, vrijwillig beleeden en ’t den edelachtbare Raad van Justitie
deeses gouvernements, uijt de ten processe gefourneerde stucken, evident
gebleeken is:

Dat den 1^e^ gevangen Job, voor ruijm twee jaaren geleeden, zig bij
zeeker complot slaaven, waaronder twee van de heer Johannes van Echten,
in naame Said en Daniel, waren die, ter zake van hun wanbedrijf,
ingevolge sententie van deezen Raade, reeds in den beginne van ’t jaar
1785 zijn g’executeerd geworden, vervoegd hebbende, met intentie om in
den thuijn van den gerepatrieerden edelachtbare heere Adriaan van Schoor
schapen te steelen, op ’t blaffen der honden van daar egter wederom
heeft moeten wijken.

Dat hij 1^e^ gevangen, (zoo hij zegt) uijt vreese dat zulx zoude worden
ontdekt, zig op de vlugt hebbende begeevens, alstoen met de meede slaven
Jacob en den 5^e^ gevangen Fortuijn gegaan is na de Tavelberg.

Dat daarop nog twee slaven van den voormelde Simon van Blerck, in name
October en Jephta, zig insgelijks bij hem 1^e^ gevangen vervoegd
hebbende; zijlieden alstoen ten getalle van vijf, zijn gegaan naar en
omstreex Stellenbosch, alwaar voorseijde Jacob Fortuijn en Jephta kort
daarop zijn gevangen genoomen, als wanneer hij eerste gevangen met
meergemelde October wederom na den Tavelberg is terug gekeerd.

Dat vervolgens bij den 1^e^ gevangen gekoomen zijnde, de slaaven Mentor
en Salomon, toebehorende eevengemelde Van Blerck, en David, slaaf van
eene Franke; hij 1^e^ gevangen alstoen besloten heeft om met dezelve en
voorseijde October na de Hanglip te gaan.

Dat hij 1^e^ gevangen aldaar aan de Hanglip nog verscheijde anderen
gedroste slaven aangetroffen en zig eenige tijd, zoo met schelpvissen,
als ’tgeen door sommige van hun in den selven schuijlhoek of
verblijfplaats gebragt wierd, erneerd hebbende, zig op zeekere dag met
eenige van dat complot, beneevens zeekeren slaaf van eenen Louw, Carolus
genaamd, begeeven heeft na de plaats van den burger Jan Otto.

Dat zijlieden aldaar uijt de paardenstal gestoolen hebben, twee paarden,
en niettegenstaande zijlieden door voorseijde Otto, verseld van eenen
Wilkens, waren agtervolgd en de 1^e^ gevangen nog door een schoot met
gekapte kogels getroffen was geworden, dezelve paarden egter na hun
verblijf plaats gebragt en opgegeeten hebben.

Dat hij 1^e^ gevangen evenwel door dien schoot bevreesd zijnde geworden
om aldaar langer te blijven, zig, beneevens voormelde David, Mentor en
Carolus, van hetzelve complot heeft afgezondert en, na met deese zijne
laatste gemelde makkers elders rondgesworven te hebben, wederom na de
Tavelberg is terug gekeert, terwijl gemelde David, Mentor en Carolus, na
zig aldaar nog een weijnig te hebben opgehouden, van hem zijn afgegaan,
zijnde alstoen, behalven verscheijde andere drossend slaven die altoos
af en toe zijn gegaan, ook nog de 2^e^, 3^e^ en 4^e^ gevangens Moses,
Francies en Jek, benevens de slaven Pedro van voornoemde Van Blerck en
April van de dragonder Veltbron, bij hem 1^e^ gevangen gekoomen.

Dat dit complot zig zedert altoos aan de Tavelberg opgehouden heeft, en
den 1^e^ gevangen meestendeels in den thuijn van bovengemelde heer Van
Echten alwaar hij, wel voornamentlijk door den 6^e^ en 7^e^ gevangens,
van mondbehoeftens en kleederen is voorzien geworden, dewelke hem 1^e^
gevangen daarenboven ook nog telkens, en wel meestentijds in een
hoenderhok naast ’t huijs van dickwijls gemelde heer Van Echten,
verborgen en het terug keeren na zijne lijfvrouw, wanneer hem zulx in ’t
zin kwam, afgeraden hebben met hem 1^e^ gevangen \[*onleesbaar*\] te
maken dat al ’tgeen ’er van tijd tot tijd gestoolen wierd op zijn 1^e^
gevangen reekening gesteld wordende, hij dan welligt gevaar liep om
gehangen off geledebraakt te worden, terwijl hij 1^e^ gevangen
intusschen na zijn complot, dat zig overdag aan den Tavelberg ophield en
des nagts om eeten te zoeken in de tuijnen omstreex ’t Rondebosje ende
Roode Bloem rondswierf, af en toe gegaan zijnde, echter nooijt zoo veel
eeten als voor hun allen genoegsaam was geweest uijt gemelde thuijn
\[*sic*\] had kunnen opdoen.

Dat dierhalven voorseijde Pedro en April eens een koebeest van de burger
Willem Versveld van de zoogenaamde Platte Klip na den berg gedreeven
hebbende, hetzelve door den 1^e^ gevangen geslagt en vervolgens met de
overige 2^e^, 3^e^ en 4^e^ gevangens geconsumeerd is.

Dat hierna de 1^e^ gevangen ook nog, met behulp van den 3^e^ en 4^e^
gevangen Francis \[*sic*\] en Jek van den manhafte Servaas van Breda,
een bul gestoolen en tot hun onderhoud na hun schuijlhoek vervoerd
heeft.

Dat voorts de 3^e^ gevangen Francies, beneevens voorseijde Pedro by
meergemelde Van Blerck, drie en bij de oud burgerraad de heer Jacobus
van Reenen, insgelijks drie schapen gestoolen en die beneevens diverse
groenten en tuijnvrugten, bij ’t complot gebragt heeft.

Dat den 5^e^ gevangen, die wel eer toebehoord heeft aan de lijfvrouw van
den 1^e^ gevangen, en dus altoos met hem 1^e^ gevangen in kennis geweest
is, hem 1^e^ gevangen dikwerf des nagts in zijn’s lijfheeren thuijn
ontfangen en van eeten voorzien heeft.

Dat hij 5^e^ gevangen vervolgens eens aan de twee eerste gevangens Job
en Moses gezegt hebbende dat in de voorkamer van ’t huijs van zijner
lijfheer twee zakken met meel stonden, de vier eerste gevangens met
malkanderen alstoen hebben overlegt om dat meel vanuijt het huijs van
gerepten Hiebner weg te halen, ten welken eijnde zij 4 eerst \[*sic*\]
gevangens dan, na genomen afspraak, zig in den nagt tusschen den 8^e^ en
9^e^ August laastleeden in den tuijn van voorseijde Hiebner hebben
begeeven, als wanneer de 3^e^ en 4^e^ gevangens bij ’t hek van den tuijn
gebleeven en de 2 eerste gevangens na ’t huijs gegaan zijnde, na met den
5^e^ gevangen een ogenblik gesprooken te hebben, wederom zijn terug
gekeert om den agteruijt gebleeven 3^e^ en 4^e^ gevangens te zeggen dat
men nu kans zag om in de kamer te koomen, gelijk de 4 eerste gevangens
zig toen ook gezamentlijk naar ’t huijs, bij ’t voorcamer vengster van
denselven Hiebner, begeeven en, volgens hun zeggens, het houte vengster
open of slegts eeven aangestoote gevonden hebbende, hetzelve
opengetrokken en alstoen het schuijfraam opgeschoven hebben; terwijl
daarna de 1^e^ en 2^e^ gevangen Job en Moses zijn na binnen gecklommen,
zijnde de 5^e^ gevangen Fortuijn middeler, nadat hij de nodige
aanweijzing gedaan had, na agteren gegaan om te zien of de andere slaven
van zijnen lijfheer wel alle in behoorlijke rust waren.

Dat nadat de 1^e^ en 2^e^ gevangens de twee zakken met meel door behulp
van den 3^e^ gevangen hadden uijt de kamer gekreegen, de eerste gevangen
Job alstoen met een tuijn hark de, in die kamer staande, bureau
opengebrooken en uijt dezelve, behalven eenig zilverwerk, ook nog het,
daarin zig bevindende, zoo zilver als papiere geld gehaald heeft, waarna
zij nog verscheijde andere goederen, dewelke zig in die kamer bevonden,
en waarvan de gevangens niets specificq hebben opgegeeven, weggenoomen
hebben; zijnde egter des anderen daags ochtends door voorseijde Hiebner
uijt zijne bureau vermist: vijftig rijxdaalders aan papieremunt, zes en
twintig rijxdaalders aan guldenstucken, dertig rijxdaalders aan oud
zilvere geld, een dubbelde zilvere knip beugel met ses potstukjes, negen
zilvere lepels, een dito zuijker trommel, een dito koekbakjes met vier
lepels en vijf vorkens. Terwijl uijt de kamer, aan dezelve bureau stond,
twee mudden meel en een kopere thee kisje, en uijt de agterkamer, daar
het wasch goed pleegt geborgen te worden: een blauwe neusdoek, een
ledige zeijldoekse zak, een vrouwe rok, een tavellaken, een manshemd,
twee vrouwe nagtmutsen en een zeijldoekse zak, die nagt meede zijn
absent geraakt, welke geroofde goederen door de gevangens dien zelfden
nagt na hun schuijlplaats zijn overgebragt, edog door den manhafte,
luijtenant Pieter van Breda, en den burger Willem Versveld, des anderen
daags, wanneer zijlieden de gevangens agtervolg hebben, voor een groot
gedeelte gevonden en aan gemelde Hiebner zijn terug gegeeven.

Dat intusschen de 5^e^ gevangen Fortuijn aan zijnen lijfheer
voorgegeeven hebbende dat hij Job en zijn complot opzoeken en in handen
van gemelde zijnen lijfheer overleeveren wilde, zig alstoen van huijs
begeeven, bij ’t complot van Job vervoegd en met hetzelve rondgesworven
heeft; terwijl hij voorts, na een maand lang bij ’tzelve complot
gebleeven te zijn, mitsgaders hier en daar uijt de tuijnen vrugtens en
groentens gestoolen te hebben, wederom na zijnen lijfheer is terug
gekeerd, voorwendende dat hij door Job en zijne makkers zoude zijn
gevleugeld en al die tijd opgehouden geworden.

Dat de 4 eerste gevangens, kort voordat zij zijn gevangen genomen,
beneevens voorseijde Pedro en April, alwederom na de Hanglip hebbende
willen gaan, daarop in de Duijnen van elkanderen zijn geraakt, terwijl
vervolgens de 1^e^ en 3^e^ gevangens weder na de Tavelberg terug
gekeerd, en de 2^e^, 3^e^ en 4^e^ gevangens geapprehendeert zijn, gelijk
meede de 1^e^ gevangen, na veele vrugtloos aangewende pogingen, egter
eijndelijk op een toevallige wijze in ’t bovengemelde hoenderhok naast
het huijs van meergemelde heere Van Echten verrast en, na met een schoot
in zijne beenen getroffen te zijn, insgelijks gevangen genoomen en, zoo
wel als zijne complices, in handen van justitie is overgeleeverd
geworden.

Dan nademaal diergelijke moedwillige aufugie en diefte in een land waar
regt en geregtigheijd behoorlijk word gehandhaafd, geensints kan worden
gedult, maar, ten afschrik van anderen diergelijke boosdoenders, ten
rigoureusten behoord te worden gepunieert.

Zoo is ’t, dat den edelachtbare Raad van Justitie, voormeld, ten dage
dienende, met alle opmerkzaamheijd geleesen en overwogen hebbende, den
schriftelijken crimineelen eijsch ende conclusie door den pro interim
fiscaal, d’ edele Gabriel Exter, *nomine officii*, op ende jeegens de
gevangens gedaan ende genoomen, mitsgaders gelet op al hetgeent ter
materie dienende was en hun edelachtbarens konde doen moveeren, recht
doende uijt naame ende van wegens de hoogmogende Heeren Staten Generaal
der Vereenigde Nederlanden, de gevangens hebben gecondemneerd, gelijk
hun edelachtbarens dezelve condemneeren mits deezen: omme gebragt te
worden ter plaatze waar men alhier gewoon is crimineele sententiën te
executeeren aldaar den 1^e^, 2^e^, 3^e^, 4^e^ en 5^e^ gevangens aan den
scherpregter overgeleeverd en den 1^e^ gevangen met een strop om den
hals onder de galg te pronk gesteld, voorts de 1^e^, 2^e^, 3^e^, 4^e^ en
5^e^ gevangens aan een paal gebonden, met roeden op de bloote rugge
strengelijk gegeesseld en daarop de 1^e^ en 2^e^ gevangens gebrandmerkt
zijnde, de 1^e^ gevangen voor den tijd zijn ’s leevens, ende 2^e^
gevangen voor den tijd van 5 agtereenvolgende jaaren in de ketting
geklonken zijnde, ten Robben Eijlande geconfineerd te worden, omme
aldaar zonder loon aan ’s edele Compagnies gemeene werken te arbeijden,
weijders den 3^e^, 4^e^ en 5^e^ gevangen voor den tijd van drie
agtereenvolgende jaren in de ketting geklonken zijnde, zodanig aan hunne
lijfheeren te huijs gezonden te worden, wijders den 6^e^ gevangen, na de
voornoemde executie te hebben aanschouwd, door de caffers gelaarst
zijnde, aan zijnen lijfheer te huijs gezonden, en den sevenden
gevangenen, na meede de executie aanschouwd te hebben, van hier na
Indiën verzonden te worden, met condemnatie van alle de gevangens in de
kosten en misen van justitie, en ontzegging van den verderen off anders
gedaanen eijsch en genoomene conclusie van den Officier.

Aldus gedaan en gesententieerd aan Cabo de Goede Hoop, den 18^e^
December 1786, mitsgaders gepronuntieerd in ’t Casteel de Goede Hoop,
den 23^e^ derzelven maand en g’executeerd ten zelven dage.

Fiat Executie, \[get.\] C.J. van de Graaff.

\[get.\] S. v. Echten, Johs. Smuts, J.M. Horak, W.F. v. Reede van
Oudtshoorn, J.M. Bletterman, C.L. Neethling, C.G. Maasdorp, Cs.
Matthiessen, G.H. Meijer, O.G. de Wet.

Mij present, \[get.\] C. van Aersen, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Since Job van Madagascar, bondsman of the widow of the late *manhafte*
Jan Hendrik Ekker, 30 years old at a guess, Moses van Bougies, slave of
the burgher Jacobus Tesselaar, 40 years old at a guess, Francies van
Mosambique, belonging to the burgher Simon van Blerck, 20 years old at a
guess, Jek van Madagascar, bondsman of the burgher adjutant, *manhafte*
Francois de Necker, 22 years old at a guess, Fortuijn van Madagascar,
slave of the burgher Petrus Johannes Hiebner, 25 years old at a guess,
Caesar van Madagascar, belonging to the former *koopman*, the honourable
Johannes van Echten, 40 years old at a guess, and Brein van Ambon, a
manumitted bondsman, 50 years old at a guess, currently their honours’
prisoners, have voluntarily confessed and since, from the other
documents furnished in the case, it has appeared evident to the
honourable Council of Justice of this government:

That fully two years ago now, the first prisoner, Job, joined a certain
gang of slaves – among whom were two of the honourable Johannes van
Echten, by the names of Said and Daniel, who were already punished at
the beginning of the year 1785 for their misdemeanours, in accordance
with the sentence of this Council[^4] – with the intention to go and
steal sheep from the garden of the repatriated honourable Adriaan van
Schoor, but at the barking of the dogs had to retreat again from there.

That the first prisoner, (so he says) from fear that this would be
discovered, then set out in flight with his fellow slaves Jacob and the
fifth prisoner, Fortuijn, and went to Table Mountain.

That thereupon two more slaves of the aforementioned Simon van Blerck,
by the names of October and Jephta, likewise came to join the first
prisoner. They then, being five in number, went to the region of
Stellenbosch, where the aforesaid Jacob, Fortuijn and Jephta were
shortly thereafter taken prisoner, which is when the first prisoner
again returned with the aforementioned October to Table Mountain.

That later, when the first prisoner was joined by the slaves Mentor and
Salomon, belonging to the aforementioned Van Blerk, and David, slave of
one Franke, he decided at that time to go with them and the aforesaid
October to Hanglip.

That the first prisoner found there at Hanglip several more runaway
slaves and, after having maintained themselves for some time with
shellfish as well as that which some of them brought to this hiding or
dwelling place, he set out on a certain day with some people of this
gang, along with a certain slave of one Louw, named Carolus, to the farm
of the burgher Jan Otto.

That they stole there two horses from the stable and, notwithstanding
their being chased by the aforesaid Otto, accompanied by one Wilkens,
and the first prisoner also being hit by a shot of chopped bullets,
brought these horses to their dwelling place and ate them.

However, that the first prisoner, because of this shot, became afraid to
remain there any longer and, with the aforementioned David, Mentor and
Carolus, separated from this gang and, after having roamed around
elsewhere with these last-mentioned comrades, they again returned to
Table Mountain. Although the said David, Mentor and Carolus, after
having kept there for some while longer, went from him, there then also
came to the first prisoner, apart from several other runaway slaves who
were forever coming and going, the second, third and fourth prisoners,
Moses, Francies and Jeck, as also the slaves Pedro of the aforementioned
Van Blerck and April of the dragoon Veltbron.

That since then this gang always kept on Table Mountain, but the first
prisoner mostly in the garden of the abovementioned honourable Van
Echten, where he was principally provided with victuals and clothes by
the sixth and seventh prisoners who, in addition, time and again, or
most of the time in fact, hid him in a chicken coop next to the house of
the aforementioned honourable Van Echten, and who also, when he got it
into his mind to return to his owner, dissuaded him from it, by making
him believe that everything that had been stolen from time to time would
be put on his account, and that he would then perhaps be in danger of
being hanged or broken on the wheel. During this time the first prisoner
was able to go now and then to his gang, which stayed on Table Mountain
during the day, but at night roamed around the gardens of Rondebosje and
Roode Bloem[^5] to look for food since he was never able to bring as
much food as would be sufficient for them all from the said garden
\[i.e. Van Echten’s\].

That consequently, the aforesaid Pedro and April once drove a cow of the
burgher Willem Versveld from the so-called Platte Klip to the mountain,
where it was slaughtered by the first prisoner and thereafter consumed
with the remaining second, third and fourth prisoners.

That after this, the first prisoner in addition stole, with the help of
the third and fourth prisoners, Francis and Jek, a bull of the
*manhafte* Servaas van Breda, and drove it to their hiding place for
their maintenance.

Further, that the third prisoner Francies, together with the aforesaid
Pedro, stole three sheep from the aforementioned Van Blerck and likewise
three from the former burgher councillor, the honourable Jacobus van
Reenen, and brought them, along with various garden fruit and
vegetables, to the gang.

That the fifth prisoner, who had previously belonged to the owner of the
first prisoner and had therefore known him ever since, often received
the first prisoner during the night in his owner’s garden and provided
him with food.

Next, that the fifth prisoner once told the first two prisoners, Job and
Moses, that there were two bags of flour in the front room of his
owner’s house, whereupon the four first prisoners deliberated with one
another to take that flour from the house of the said Hiebner. To this
end, the first four prisoners, in accordance with what they had agreed,
went into the garden of Hiebner during the night of 8 and 9 August of
this year, when the third and fourth prisoners remained at the gate of
this garden, while the first two prisoners went to the house and, after
having spoken with the fifth prisoner for a moment, returned again to
tell the third and fourth prisoners, who had remained behind, that they
now had an opportunity to get into the room. The first four prisoners
then also went together to the house of Hiebner and to the window of the
front room and found, in accordance with their instructions, the shutter
open or only half closed, which they opened and then pulled up the
sash-window, after which the first and second prisoners, Job and Moses,
climbed inside. The fifth prisoner meanwhile, after having given the
necessary directions, went to the back to see that the other slaves of
his owner were all properly asleep.

That after the first and second prisoners with the help of the third
prisoner had moved the two bags with flour from the room, the first
prisoner Job then broke open with a garden rake the bureau standing in
that room and, in addition to some silver work, also took from it all
the money, both silver and paper, which was inside it; after which they
took away numerous other goods which were in the room and of which the
prisoners themselves were unable to list anything specific. However, on
the morning of the following day, the aforesaid Hiebner missed from his
bureau: fifty rixdollars in paper money, twenty six rixdollars in
guilder coins, thirty rixdollars in old silver money, a double silver
chatelaine bag with six precious coins, nine silver spoons, one silver
sugar box, one silver cake tray with four spoons and five forks; while
there also went missing that night from the room in which the bureau
stood: two *mudden *of flour and a small copper tea chest; and from the
back room where the washing is usually kept: one blue
pocket-handkerchief, one empty canvas bag, one woman’s dress, one
tablecloth, one men’s shirt, two women’s nightcaps and one canvas bag.
These stolen goods were brought to the prisoners’ hiding place that very
same night, yet most was found the following day by the lieutenant,
*manhafte* Pieter van Breda, and the burgher Willem Versveld, when they
went after the prisoners, and was returned to the said Hiebner.

That in the meantime the fifth prisoner pretended to his owner that he
wanted to search for Job and his gang in order to deliver them into the
hands of his owner; when he went from the house, joined the gang of Job
and roamed around with them. After having remained with this gang for a
month, and also stole fruit and vegetables from the gardens here and
there, he again returned to his owner, claiming that he was trussed by
Job and his comrades and held prisoner by them for all this time.

That the first four prisoners, shortly before they were taken prisoner,
wanted to go again to Hanglip with the aforesaid Pedro and April, but
that they got separated from one another in the dunes, and while the
first and third prisoners returned again to Table Mountain, the second,
third and fourth prisoners were apprehended, as also the first prisoner
who, after many fruitless attempts had been made, was finally surprised
in an accidental manner in the abovementioned chicken coop next to the
house of the aforementioned honourable Van Echten; and, after having
been hit with a shot in his legs, was also taken prisoner and, like his
accomplices, delivered into the hands of justice.

Since such a wanton flight and theft cannot, under any circumstances, be
tolerated in a country where law and justice are properly maintained,
but should be punished most rigorously, as a deterrent to other similar
malefactors.

Thus it is, that the honourable Council of Justice, serving today,
having read and considered with attentiveness the written *crimineelen
eijsch ende conclusie* drawn up and delivered for and against the
prisoners by the interim fiscal, the honourable Gabriel Exter, in his
official capacity, as well as having noted everything that served the
case and could have moved their honours, practising justice in the name
of and on behalf of the high and mighty Lords States General of the
United Netherlands, and having judged the prisoners, is sentencing them
with this: to be taken to the place where criminal sentences are usually
executed here, there the first, second, third, fourth and fifth
prisoners to be handed over to the executioner, the first prisoner to be
exposed under the gallows with a rope around his neck, then the first,
second, third, fourth and fifth prisoners to be tied to a stake and
severely scourged with rods on their bare backs, whereupon the first and
second prisoners are to be branded, and the first prisoner for the time
of his life and the second prisoner for a time of five consecutive years
to be confined, riveted in chains, on Robben Island, to labour there
without wages on the honourable Company’s public works. Further the
third, fourth and fifth prisoners to be riveted in chains for the time
of three consecutive years and to be sent home to their owners like
this, further the sixth prisoner, after having witnessed the
aforementioned execution, to be whipped by the *caffers* and to be sent
home to his owner and the seventh prisoner, after also having witnessed
the execution, to be sent from here to the Indies;[^6] with sentencing
all the prisoners to the costs and expenditure of justice, and denying
the further or otherwise drawn-up *eijsch* and the *conclusie* taken by
the Officer.

Thus done and sentenced at the Cape of Good Hope on 18 December 1786, as
also pronounced in the Castle of Good Hope on the 23^rd\ ^of the same
month and executed on the same day.[^7]

Let the sentence be done, \[signed\] C.J. van Graaff.

\[signed\] S. v. Echten, Johs. Smuts, J.M. Horak, W.F. v. Reede van
Oudtshoorn, J.M. Bletterman, C.L. Neethling, C.G. Maasdorp, Cs.
Matthiessen, G.H. Meijer, O.G. de Wet.

In my presence, \[signed\] C. van Aersen, secretary.

[^1]: * On the popularity of Table Mountain as a refuge for slave
    runaways, see 1735 Company slaves n. 1.*

[^2]: * On the runaway slave community at Hangklip, see 1737 Aron van
    Madagascar, n. 1. It seems to have revived in the 1780s, or at least
    to have come again to the attention of the authorities. After a
    spate of cases dealing with it in the 1730s (in this volume see 1737
    Aron van Madagscar), another group of cases appeared before the
    Council of Justice in the 1780s (see this one, 1785 Spadilje van
    Siam and 1786 October van Madagascar). *

[^3]: * The documentation for this case also includes the *eijsch* and
    the examination of each of the accused, CJ 424, ff. 571-681. *

[^4]:  Daniel van de Caab, Saijd van Java and Gree van Sambouwa were all
    sentenced on 6 May 1785 to be whipped, branded and sent to work in
    chains on Robben Island for desertion and theft, CJ 67, ff. 49-50.

[^5]:  Roughly the region of modern-day Woodstock.

[^6]:  As a free man, Brein van Ambon was treated differently from the
    others. Brein had arrived from Batavia and worked in the Company
    gardens. He strenuously denied having aided any of the other
    accused, or knowing that they were runaways or even ever having seen
    Job, CJ 424, ff. 675-81. In the absence of evidence against him, he
    could not be convicted, but the court clearly decided that he was
    more of a nuisance than he was worth and should be returned to
    Batavia.

[^7]:  This was the sentence recommended in the *eijsch*, CJ 424, ff.
    593-95 and it was recorded in the *regtsrollen*, CJ 68, ff. 209-10.
