1.  PETRUS JOUBERT

*Slaves could be caught up in disputes between their owners. In this
case Adam van Bengalen, a cattle herder owned by Johannes Roux, was
severely beaten by Petrus Joubert, son of another burgher, because he
was grazing livestock on common land.*^*[^1]*^* Joubert’s slaves
assisted him in the task. Roux complained to the local landdrost, but it
does not appear that any action was taken against Joubert.*^*[^2]*^* *

**1/STB 3/12** Criminele Verklaringen, 1786-1793, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeven ten overstaan van de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde
heemraden d’ edele Johan Bernard Hoffman en Pieter Gerh. Wium, ende ter
requisitie van den koopman en landdrost alhier, de heer Hendrik Lodewijk
Bletterman, door ende van wegens den burger Johs. Hendrik Roux, van
competenten ouderdom, luijdende hetselve als volgd:

Dat den relatant laatst gepasseerde Dingsdag, den 4^e^ deser, uit
desselvs thuin met een graaf op de schouderen naar ’t huis gaande,
gezien heevt dat den burger Petrus Joubert, zijnde een voorzoon van
desselvs buurman, den burger Gerrit Victor, met een zogenaamde
agterosses sjambok in handen, twee zijner slaven jongens volgde en zo
cours namen na des relatants troup beesten aan de overzijde der
Dwarsrivier op ’s edele Compagnies veld, na gissing ruim een duijsend
treeden van het eigendomsgrond van voorseijde Victor, weijdende; wanneer
den relatant, bedugd zijnde dat gemelde Joubert, gelijk toenmalen al is
geschied, in zin mogte hebben zijn relatants beestewagter zonder reeden
af te straffen en te mishandelen, en zig daarom ook haastende naar huijs
te lopen en de graaf weg te leggen, met oogmerk om vervolgens, met
eenige van zijn slaven weeder derwaarts zig te spoeden ten eijnde
gedagte Joubert in zulx een voornemen te verhinderen en mishandilingen
\[*sic*\] aan zijn slaav voor te komen, en, nauwlijks weder uit het
huijs gekomen zijnde, ook zeer duijdelijk was komen te bespeuren dat
voorseijde Joubert desselvs beestwagter, Adam genaamt, door drie zijner
slaven op de grond liet vasthouden, terwijl hij besig was denselven met
voormelde sjambok te slaan.

Dat den relatant alstoen terstond met vier zijner slaven jongens, zo
schielijk als zijlieden immer konden, toegelopen en (nadat een geruijme
tijd, wegens de moeijlijkheijd om de tusschenbijde zig bevindende
bosschen en rivieren te passeeren, verlopen was) gemelde Joubert op een
zeer korten afstand genaderd zijnde, denselven daarop eerst met slaan
was uitgescheijden; wanneer desselvs afgestraften beestwagter op de
grond blijvende leggen; en den relatant bij hem komende, bevonden had
denselve deerlijk mishandeld te zijn, als leggende gemelde Adam voor
dood en in onmagt ter aarde, terwijl het bloed hem uit mond en neus
vloeijde en hij op de billen strengelijk gegeesseld was, in welke
omstandigheijd den relatant denselve naar huijs had laten dragen en
leijden door voormelde zijne meede genomene slaven; mitsgaders daags
daaraan met een wagen na herwaards laten transporteeren om zulk aan den
requirant te vertonen en deswegens zijn beklag tegen voornoemde Joubert
in te brengen.

Niets meer relateerende, geevt den relatant voor reedenen van wetenschap
als in den text, berijd zijnde hetselve ter aller tijde met solmneelen
eeden te staven.

Aldus gerelateerd ter secretarije aan Stellenbosch, den 6^e^ October
1791.

\[get.\] Johannis \[*sic*\] Hendrik Roux.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

Mij present, \[get.\] J.P. Faure, secretaris.

**1/STB 3/12** Criminele Verklaringen, 1786-1793, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeven, ten overstaan van de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde
heemraden d’ edele Johan Bernhard Hoffman en Pieter Gerhard Wium, ende
ter requisitie van den koopman en landdrost, de heer Hendrik Lodewijk
Bletterman, door ende van weegens Adam van Bengalen, oud na gissing
dertig jaren, lijfeijgen van den burger Johs. Hendrik Roux, luijdende
hetselve als volgd:

Dat den relatant het vhee van zijne lijfheer oppassende, hetselve nu
laatst gepasseerde Dingsdag na gewoonte heevt laten weijden in ’s edele
Compagnies veld aan geene zijde der Dwarsrivier, wanneer de burger
Petrus Joubert, bij zig hebbende drie zijner slaven jongens, aldaar in
het veld bij den relatant gekomen zijnde, hem relatant in substantie is
komen te vragen: Wat laat jij hier gras vreeten?, en daarop de
voorseijde drie jongens gelast hebbende den relatant vast te houden en
op den grond neder te leggen, die zulks terstond ook hebben gedaan,
denselven Joubert vervolgens met een, door hem meedegebragte, zogenaamde
agterosses sjambok den relatant sodanig heevt geslagen, dat desselvs
aangehad hebbende broek daar door ten eenemaal in stukken geraakt en de
opperhuijd, mitsgaders het vleis, van zijn billen, als met een mes of
ander scherp instrument te zijn geschend, is geopend geworden (zo als de
wonden daarvan aan de ondergeteekende gecommitteerdens vertoond, zulx
ook duijdelijk aantonen) dat den relatant zo, ter oorzake dier sjambok
slagen, als van één, of door voorseijde Joubert, dan wel door een zijner
slaven, hem relatant van agteren, tusschen de schouderbladen,
toegebragte vuistslag \<wanneer hij het bloed was uijtgebraakt\>^[^3]^
geheel onmagtig ter aarde zijnde blijven leggen, dezelvs lijfheer
anstons \[*sic*\] daarna was gekomen met vier zijner meede slaven, die
den relatant eerst een end wegs gedragen en vervolgens naar ’t huijs
hebben geleijd; verklarende den relatant ook nog zoo veel pijn, zo aan
de wonden op dezelvs billen, als innerlijk aan de borst en de zijde
rugge, te gevoelen.

Niets meer relateerende, geevt den relatant voor redenen van wetenschap
als in den text, betuijgende zulx de zuijvere waarheid te zijn.

Aldus gerelateerd ter woonhuijse van den burger Pieter Schalk Hugo,
alhier in de dorpe geleegen, den 6^e^ October 1791.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

Dit kruijsmerk X is door de relatant Adam eigenhandig gesteld.

Mij present, \[get.\] J.P. Faure, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement, given in the presence of the undersigned deputised
*heemraden*, the honourables Johan Bernard Hoffman and Pieter Gerh.
Wium, and on the requisition of the landdrost here, the honourable
*koopman* Hendrik Lodewijk Bletterman, by and on behalf of the burgher
Johs. Hendrik Roux, of competent age, going as follows:  
  
That on the past Tuesday, the 4^th\ ^of this month, when the testifier
was going from his garden to the house with a spade over his shoulder,
he saw the burgher Petrus Joubert, who is the *voorzoon*^[^4]^ of his
neighbour, the burgher Gerrit Victor, following two of his own slave
*jongens*, with a so-called hind oxen *sjambok* in his hand,^[^5]^ and
going in the direction of the testifier’s herd of cattle grazing on the
opposite side of the Dwars River^[^6]^ on the honourable Company’s veld,
fully a thousand paces, at a guess, from the property of the aforesaid
Victor. Whereupon the testifier became worried that the said Joubert, as
has happened before, might be planning to punish and maltreat the
testifier’s cattle herder without any reason; and he therefore rushed
home to put away the spade, with the aim to then rush again thither with
some of his slaves in order to stop the said Joubert in his intention
and to prevent the maltreatment of his slave. And when he had just come
out of the house, he noticed very clearly how the aforesaid Joubert had
his cattle herder, by the name of Adam, held down to the ground by three
of his slaves, while he was busy beating him with the aforesaid
*sjambok*.

That the testifier then immediately ran with his four slave *jongens*,
as fast as they possibly could, and (after a considerable amount of time
had passed because of the difficulty in crossing the river and bushes
which were in-between) only when they were nearing the said Joubert at a
very short distance, did he stop the beating. Whereupon his punished
cattle herder remained lying on the ground; and when the testifier got
to him, he found him to have been pitifully maltreated, as the said Adam
was lying for dead and powerlessly on the ground, while blood was
running from his mouth and nose, and he was severely scourged on his
buttocks, in which circumstances the testifier had the same carried and
led home by the aforementioned slaves he brought with him; besides
having him transported the following day on a wagon to show this
\[maltreatment\] to the petitioner and to bring in his complaint
concerning this against the aforementioned Joubert.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, being willing
to confirm the same at any time with solemn oaths.

Thus related at the office of the secretary at Stellenbosch on 6 October
1791.

\[signed\] Johannis Hendrik Roux.

As delegates, \[signed\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

In my presence, \[signed\] J.P. Faure, secretary.

TRANSLATION

Statement, given in the presence of the undersigned deputised
*heemraden*, the honourables Johan Bernard Hoffman and Pieter Gerh.
Wium, and on the requisition of the landdrost here, the honourable
*koopman* Hendrik Lodewijk Bletterman, by and on behalf of Adam van
Bengalen, thirty years old at a guess, bondsman of the burgher Johs.
Hendrik Roux, going as follows:

That on the past Tuesday, when the testifier, who looks after the stock
of his owner, was letting them graze, as per usual, on the honourable
Company’s veld on the other side of the Dwars River, the burgher Petrus
Joubert, who had three of his slave *jongens* with him, came to the
testifier there in the veld, and asked him in essence: “Why are you
grazing them here?”, and upon this ordered the aforesaid three *jongens*
to hold fast the testifier and to lay him down on the ground, which they
also did at once, when the same Joubert beat the testifier with a
so-called hind oxen *sjambok*, which he had brought with him, in such a
manner that the trousers he was wearing became entirely tattered and the
outer skin, as also the flesh, of his buttocks was opened, as if it had
been damaged by a knife or another sharp instrument (as the wounds
thereof, shown to the undersigned delegates, also clearly indicate).
That the testifier – both as a result of the *sjambok* lashes and a blow
he received on the back between his shoulder blades with a fist, given
either by the aforesaid Joubert or by one of his slaves, which is when
he started bleeding – remained lying totally powerless on the ground,
when his owner presently got there with four of his fellow slaves, who
first carried the testifier some way and thereafter led him home. The
testifier also declares to still experience much pain both from the
wounds on his buttocks and internally in his chest and the side of his
back.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of his statement as in the text, declaring it to be the whole
truth.

Thus related in the residence of the burgher Pieter Schalk Hugo,
situated here in the town, on 6 October 1791.

This mark X was set down by the testifier Adam with his own hand.

As delegates, \[signed\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

In my presence, \[signed\] J.P. Faure, secretary.

[^1]:  * Nothing about the background to this case is known, but Joubert
    might have contended the use of the grazing land. The statement that
    he had beaten the herder before implies that this was a
    long-standing dispute. *

[^2]: * These are the only two documents concerning this case in the
    Stellenbosch records. There is no mention of it in the criminal
    *regtsrollen*. *

[^3]:  The part between angled brackets was written above the line here.

[^4]:  On the meaning of this, see 1776 Julij van Timor, n. 9.

[^5]:  A *sjambok* used to beat the hind oxen of a wagon, perhaps
    meaning a *sjambok* shorter than a normal one.

[^6]:  A tributary of the Berg River, between Stellenbosch and
    Franschhoek.
