1.  FRANCOIS DE WET

*The evidence in this case was collected by the Stellenbosch landdrost
after he received a complaint by the slave David van de Caab about the
actions of his owner, Francois de Wet. David accused De Wet of causing
the deaths of the young child of the slave Jacomijn, David’s partner,
and, three years earlier, that of his sister, Stijn. *

*The case shows the difficulties encountered by a slave family. David
formed part of a slave kinship network on the farm, albeit one which was
devastated by the actions of his owner. Jacomijn, as a young mother, had
been working as a wet nurse on another farm and was accused of
neglecting her own child. Stijn had tried to abort her child and was
whipped for being the suspected carrier of a venereal disease.*^*[^1]*^*
*

*It appears that no action was taken against De Wet. Possibly the
landdrost considered that the evidence was uncertain, and that Stijn may
have died from her attempted abortion. *

**1/STB** **3/12** Criminele Verklaringen, 1786-1793, unpaginated.

Relaas gegeeven, ten overstaan van de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde
heemraden, d’ edele Pieter Gerhard Wium en Christman Joël Ackerman, ende
ter requisitie van den koopman en landdrost alhier de heer Hendrik
Lodewijk Bletterman, door ende van weegens David van de Caab, oud naar
gissing dertig jaaren, lijfeigen van den oud burger lieutenant, de
manhafte Francois de Wet, luijdende hetzelve als volgt:

Dat de slavinne van des relatants lijfheer, in naame Jacomijn, met wien
den relatant verkeering houd, na circa vier maanden bij en ter plaatse
van de manhafte Johannes de Waal geweest te zijn om het jongste kind van
gemelde De Waal te zuijgen, op zeekeren Zondag, omtrent veerthien dagen
voor het laatste Nieuw Jaar wijder te huijs gekomen zijnde, des
relatants lijfheer gemelde Jacomijn telkens, wanneer zij haar kind, dat
des gantschen dag niets anders deede als schreeuwen, van de grond en aan
de borst nam zulx was komen te verbieden, zeggende in substantie: Jij
moet niet denken dat jij bij De Waal bent om des geheelen dag door met
het kind op de schoot te zitten; en dit zeggen een en andermaal,
mitsgaders op Dingsdag daaraan herhaald hebbende, gemelde Jacomijn des
relatants voormelde lijfheer alstoen had toegevoegd: Bij sieur De Waal
heb ik het wel ook altoos iemand gehad om mijn kind op te passen maar nu
niemand, zij zal zig nog dood schreeuwen; wanneer des relatants lijfheer
hierover toornig geworden het agterpaarden sjambok, in de combuijs
hangende, genomen en opgemelde Jacomijn, terwijl deselve het kind op de
armen droeg, daar meede verscheijde slagen gegeeven, mitsgaders bij die
geleegenheid het kind meede eenige slagen \<insonderheijd twee zigtbare
wonden op het voorhoofd\>^[^2]^ toegebragt hebbende; was gemelde des
relatants kind, dat bevorens vris \[*sic*\] en gezond is geweest,
daarvan dien eigensten Dingsdagnagt overleeden en daags daaraan begraven
geworden; bij welke geval tegenwoordig waren geweest de weduwe Jan
Theron, een slave jongen van gemelde weduwe Theron met naame Goliad,
een, bij des relatants lijfheer woonende, Hottentottin met naame Anna,
de meede slaav van des relatants lijfheer, Fortuijn genaamt

Verklarende den relatant wijders dat voor circa drie jaren geleeden,
zonder in de preciezen tijd bepaald te willen zijn, bij des relatants
lijfheer woonagtig geweest zijnde zeekeren Hottentot, wiens naam den
relatant zig niet herinneren kan, denselven, alvorens zijn verbonden
tijd te hebben uijtgediend, van daar was weggelopen en, eenigen tijd
daarna door de slaven van des relatants lijfheer widers \[*sic*\]
opgevangen en t’ huijs gebragt zijnde, denselven met de Venus ziekte
behebt te zijn. Dat des relatants lijfheer gemelde Hottentot alstoen had
gevraagd waar hij aan die ziekte was gekomen, en ten antwoord gekregen
hebbende, van des relatants zuster, de slavinne Stijn, met wien hij
altoos verkeering zoude hebben gehouden; des relatants lijfheer daarop
terstond met een agtersjambok gemelde slavinne, die reeds ziekelijk,
edog altoos gaande en staande, was geweest, in den nademiddag een
afrossing had gegeven; wanneer gemelde des relatants zuster terstond na
de ontfangene slagen zig te bed begeeven hebbende, alsmeede dien
eigensten avond was komen te overlijden; terwijl des relatants lijfheer
het lijk dier slavinne uit het woonhuijs, een poos daarna in een
buijtenvertrek heevt doen transporteeren, daags daaraan door den
relatant, voormelde Fortuijn en nog twee andere meede slaaven, welker
namen den relatant zig, weegens de langdanigheid van tijd, zig niet te
binnen brengen kan, laten begraven.

Dat den relatant destijds na herwaards op weg geweest zijnde om dit
voorgevallene met desselvs zuster den heer requirant ter kennisse te
brengen, en tevens over de harde behandeling van gemelde zijnen lijfheer
te klagen, den zwager van desselvs lijfheer, Jacobus du Toit genaamt,
alstoen met twee paarden den relatant was nagevolgd en hem elders,
omtrend des plaats van den burger Charl Theron, agterhaald hebbende,
denselven den relatant heevt overgehaald om op een dier paarden te gaan
zitten en weder terug naar huijs te rijden, hetgeen den relatant ook
heevt gedaan.

Zeggende den relatant dat hij zig te binnen brengende het ongeluk dat nu
reeds twee malen zijn famille \[*sic*\] door de strenge behandeling van
desselvs lijfheer is overgekoomen, van spijt en verdriet onmogelijk
langer onder denselven kan blijven dienen, en daarom den heer requirant
ook heevt versogt niet weder na gemelde zijnen lijfheer terug gezonden
te mogen worden.

Niets meer relateerende, geevt den relatant voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, betuijgende zulx de zuijvere waarheid te
zijn.

Aldus gerelateerd ter secretarije aan Stellenbosch, den 10^e^ Januarij
1792.

Dit kruijsmerk X is door den relatant eijgenhandig gesteld.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] P.G. Wium, C. Joël Ackerman.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] J.P. Faure, secretaris.

**1/STB** **3/12** Criminele Verklaringen, 1786-1793, unpaginated.

Compareerde voor de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde heemraden, d’ edele
Johan Bernhard Hoffman en Pieter Gerhard Wium, de Bastaard
Hottentottinne Anna, oud na gissing dertig jaren, dewelke, ter
requisitie van den koopman en landdrost, de heer Hendrik Lodewijk
Bletterman, verklaarde hoe waar is:

Dat voor omtrend drie jaren geleeden, zonder dat de comparante de
juisten tijd weet te bepalen, de manhafte Francois de Wet, bij wien de
comparante bereids twaalf en meer jaren is woonagtig geweest, met
desselvs huisvrouw na Stellenbosch zullende rijden de slavinne van
gemelde De Wet, Steijn genaamt, alstoen gaarne heevt willen meede
rijden, haar juffrouw haar niet willende meede neemen omdat se reeds
vier maanden zwanger was, deselve Stijn daarop azijn met buskruijt en
schoorsteenroet tezamen gemengd, had gebruikt om haar vrugt af te
drijven, en ziende dat zulx aan het oogmerk niet voldeet, zij voorts,
tot dat einde, een en andermaal \<had gedronken en gegeeten\>^[^3]^ een
goede quantiteit brandewijn met loog water, rozijnen en slangevel; dat
gemelde slavinne hiervan ziek geworden en door haar juffrouw gevraagd
zijnde, wat zij manqueerd, zij daarop was komen te anwoorden zulx niet
te weeten. Wanneer der comparantes juffrouw genoemde Steijn eenige malen
medecijnen ten gebruike gegeeven hebbende, dit nogthans niets heevt
geholpen, maar deselve Steijn in tegendeel bij continuatie bleev
vomeeren; terwijl meergemelde slavinne Stijn na drie dagen dus
onputtelijk geweest te zijn, haar maandstonde zeer zwaar gekreegen
hebbende, alstoen tot de comparante in substantie had gezegd: Nu moet ik
barsten en sterven; zoals deselve ook nog dien eigensten avond
overleeden en daags daaraan begraven geworden was.

Dat de mede slavinne van opgemelde De Wet, in naame Jacomijn, na eenigen
tijd aan de Vier en Twintig rivieren bij de zwager van haar lijfheer,
Johannes de Waal, geweest te zijn om het kind van hem De Waal te zuijgen
op zeekeren Zondag in de laatst gepasseerde maand December weder thuijs
gekomen en, onder anderen, eenige dagen daaraan uitgegaan zijnde om
elders varkensbladeren te snijden, haar zieke kind t’ huijs laatende;
wanneer dat werk verrigt, weeder terug gekomen was, dat kind, hetwelk
gedurende het afweesig van de moeder niets anders heevt gedaan als
schreeuwen, deerlijk met slagen was komen te mishandelen, zodat zelvs
haar man, de slaaf David, haar heevt gevraagd waarom sij dat kind zo
sloeg, met bijvoeging: Jij zal het nog dood slaan, en in substantie ten
antwoord bekomen hebbende: Dat raakt jou niet!; den comparants baas,
voornoemde De Wet, op dat gerugt vanuit het voorhuijs in de combuijs
gekomen, meergemelde Jacomijn met een agterpaarden sjambok, terwijl
deselve haar kind op de armen droeg, twee á drie slagen over deselve
\[*sic*\] armen had toegebragt, wanneer genoemde slavinne haastig na
binnen in het voorhuijs gelopen is, door haar lijfheer agtervolgd
zijnde, der comparantes juffrouw alstoen tusschenbijde is gekomen en
voor deselve een voorspraak was geweest, invoege zij dan ook verder geen
slagen heevt ontfangen.

Dat meergemelde Jacomijn dien avond met haar kind, hetwelk toen erger
ziek als tevooren was geweest, in een buitenkamer na bed gegaan en den
volgende morgen weder opgestaan, mitsgaders in het voorhuijs gekomen
zijnde, door deselve ook niet heevt gezegt haar kind slegter te weesen
maar in tegendeel, op de vrage van de comparante, hoe haar kind zig
bevond, heevt g’antwoord, hetselven dien nagt wel geslapen te hebben,
terwijl de slavinne, na verloop van omtrend een uur, andermaal na
voorseijde buitenkamer gegaan wesende om het kind te halen en in huijs
te brengen, hetselve alstoen op het bed dood leggende had gevonden;
zonder dat de comparante aan het lighaam van dat kind iets anders heevt
kunnen ontdekken als alleen een klijn schraapje aan het voorhoofd,
hetwelke de comparante sustineerd veroorzaakt te zijn door een val die
Jacomijn met dat kind heevt gedaan wanneer van haren gedagte lijfheer
slagen heevt ontfangen.

Niets meer verklaarende, geevt den comparante voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, betuijgende zulx de zuivere waarheid te
zijn.

Aldus gepasseert ter secretarije aan Stellenbosch, de 11^e^ Januarij
1792.^[^4]^

Dit teeken X is door de Bastaard Hottentottin Anna eijgenhandig gesteld.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] J.P. Faure, secretaris.

**1/STB** **3/12** Criminele Verklaringen, 1786-1793, unpaginated.

Compareerde voor de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde heemraden, d’ edele
Johan Bernhard Hoffman en Pieter Gerhard Wium, Fortuin van Bengalen, oud
na gissing veertig jaren, lijfeijgen van de manhafte Francois de Wet,
dewelke, ter requisitie van de koopman en landdrost alhier, de heer
Hendrik Lodewijk Bletterman, verklaarde hoe waar is:

Dat den comparant op zeekeren avond, circa drie jaaren geleeden, zonder
den precisen tijd te kunnen bepalen, van zijn werk, dien dag elders op
het land verrigt, naar ’t huijs gegaan en, in de combuijs gekomen
zijnde, met verwondering gezien had dat de slavinne van opgemelde zijnen
lijfheer, Stijn genaamt, die des morgens, wanneer den comparant uit het
huijs was gegaan vris en gezond was geweest, aldaar in de combuijs dood
lag, zonder dat de comparant weet te zeggen hoe of waaraan deselve
overleeden is; hebbende den comparant alleen aan de overblijfzels kunnen
ontwaren dat deselve kort tevoren veel gevomeert had, en was gemelde
slavinne nog dien avond door den comparant, de meede slaav David en nog
enige der andere meede slaven van desselvs lijfheer, wiens namen den
comparant zig wegens de langdurigheid en tijd niet meer te binnen
brengen kan, op ordre van gemelde zijn lijfheer na een buitenvertrek
gebragt en des volgenden daags in den morgen begraven geworden.

Dat omtrent veerthien dagen voor het laatste Nieuw Jaar, de slavinne
Jacomijn uijtgegaan zijnde om zogenaamde varkensbladeren te halen, haar
zuigend kind, dat met haar, kort te vooren, ziek van des comparants
lijfheers zwager, de manhafte Johannes de Waal, thuijs was gekoomen, in
de combuijs bij de andere slave kinderen agterlatende, hetselve bij
continuatie niets heevt gedaan als schreeuwen, wanneer gemelde Jacomijn
weeder terug gekeerd weesende, dat kind daarover zodanig heevt gekastijd
dat voormelde David. met wien deselve Jacomijn verkeering houd, haar al
vragende heevt toegevoegd: Waarom slaat jij het kind zo, jij zult het
nog dood slaan; terwijl des relatants voornoemde lijfheer daarop
toegekomen, met een gewone sjambok Jacomijn, die haar kind op de armen
droeg, drie slagen toegebragt hebbende, deselve daarop na binnen in het
voorhuijs was gelopen. Had den comparant daags daaraan, terwijl bezig
was een beest te slagten, van de andere zijne meede slaven verstaan, dat
het kind van Jacomijn overleeden was, zonder te kunnen zeggen wat van
deselvs dood de oorzaak is geweest; zijnde het lijk door David en den
comparant dien zelven dag begraven geworden.

Niets meer verklarende, geevt den comparant voor redenen van weetenschap
als in den text, betuijgende zulx de zuivere waarheid te zijn.

Dat aldus passeerde ter secretarije van Stellenbosch den 11^e^ Januarij
1792.^[^5]^

Dit kruijsmerk X is door de slaav Fortuijn eigenhandig gesteld.

Als gecommitteerdens, \[get.\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

Mij praesent, \[get.\] J.P. Faure, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement, given in the presence of the undersigned deputised
*heemraden*, the honourables Pieter Gerhard Wium and Christman Joël
Ackerman, and on the requisition of the landdrost here, the honourable
*koopman* Hendrik Lodewijk Bletterman, by and on behalf of David van de
Caab, thirty years old at a guess, bondsman of the former burgher
lieutenant, the *manhafte* Francois de Wet, which goes as follows:  
  
That after having been with and on the farm of the *manhafte* Johannes
de Waal for about four months to suckle the youngest child of the said
De Waal,^[^6]^ the slave of the testifier’s owner, by the name of
Jacomijn and with whom the testifier has a relationship, returned home
on a certain Sunday, about fourteen days before the last New Year.
Whenever the said Jacomijn picked up her child, who that whole day had
been doing nothing but crying, and held it to her bosom, the testifier’s
owner forbade it, saying in essence: “You shouldn’t think you’re with De
Waal where you can sit all day long with the child on your lap”, which
utterance he repeated a couple of times and when he did so again on the
Tuesday thereafter, the said Jacomijn then answered him: “At *Sieur* De
Waal’s I at least always had somebody to look after my child, but now
there’s nobody; one day she will cry herself to death”. Whereupon the
testifier’s owner became so angry over this that he took the *sjambok
*for the back horses, which was hanging in the kitchen, and dealt the
aforementioned Jacomijn, while she was holding the child in her arms,
several blows with it, besides also dealing some blows to the child (in
particular two visible wounds on its forehead) on this occasion, as a
result of which the testifier’s child, who before this had been well and
healthy, passed away the night of that very Tuesday, and was buried the
following day. At which incident were present: the widow Jan Theron, a
slave *jongen* of the said widow Theron, by the name of Goliad, a female
Hottentot living at his owner’s, by the name of Anna, and a fellow slave
of the testifier’s owner, named Fortuijn.

Besides which the testifier declares that, about three years ago,
without wanting to determine the precise date, there had been residing
at his owner’s a certain Hottentot, whose name the testifier cannot
recall, who, before having served his agreed time,^[^7]^ ran away from
there, and when he was captured again after some time and brought home
by the slaves of the testifier’s owner, he was suffering from a venereal
disease. That the testifier’s owner then asked the said Hottentot where
he had got this disease, and received as answer that it was the sister
of the testifier, viz. the slave Stijn, with whom he had been having a
relationship. Upon this, the testifier’s owner immediately gave the said
woman slave, who was already ill, but still up and about, a thrashing
with a back *sjambok* that afternoon; after which the testifier’s
sister, immediately after receiving this hiding, took to bed and came to
pass away that very same evening, when, after a short while, the
testifier’s owner had the corpse of this slave transported from the
house to an outside room and, on the following day, had her buried by
the testifier, the aforementioned Fortuijn and two other fellow slaves
whose names the testifier cannot recall because of the length of time.

At that time, when the testifier went on his way here in order to inform
the honourable petitioner of this incident with his sister, and at the
same time to complain about the harsh treatment of his said owner, the
brother-in-law of his owner, named Jacobus du Toit, followed the
testifier with two horses, caught up with him in the vicinity of the
farm of the burgher Charl Theron, and convinced him to go and sit on one
of these horses and to ride back home with him, which the testifier also
did.^[^8]^

The testifier says that when he recollects the misfortune his family has
had to endure, already twice now, as a result of the strict treatment of
his owner, it is impossible for him, on account of his regret and grief,
to continue serving the same, and he therefore in addition requests the
honourable petitioner not to be returned again to his said owner.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, declaring it
to be the whole truth.

Thus related at the office of the secretary at Stellenbosch on 10
January 1792.

This cross X was made by the testifier with his own hand.

As delegates, \[signed\] P.G. Wium, C. Joël Ackerman.

In my presence, \[signed\] J.P. Faure, secretary.

TRANSLATION

There appears before us, the undersigned deputised *heemraden*, the
honourables Johan Bernhard Hoffman and Pieter Gerhard Wium, the
*Bastaard-Hottentot* Anna, 30 years old at a guess, who, on the
requisition of the landdrost, the honourable *koopman* Hendrik Lodewijk
Bletterman, declares it to be the truth:

That about three years ago, without the deponent being able to determine
the exact date, when the *manhafte* Francois de Wet, at whose place the
deponent had already been living twelve or more years, was going to
drive to Stellenbosch with his wife, the slave of the said De Wet, named
Steijn, wanted very much to go with them. And since her *juffrouw* did
not want to take her with them since she was already four months
pregnant, Stijn then drank vinegar mixed with gunpowder and soot from
the chimney in order to abort her fetus, and, seeing that this did not
meet her objective, she then, to this end, drank and ate once or twice a
good quantity of brandy with lye,^[^9]^ raisins and snake-skin. That the
said slave became ill from this and, when asked by her *juffrouw* what
the matter was with her, replied that she did not know. Whereupon the
deponent’s *juffrouw* a couple of times gave the said Steijn medicine to
use, yet this did not help at all, as, on the contrary, the same Steijn
continued to vomit constantly; while Steijn, after having been weak like
this for three days, started menstruating very heavily, which is when
she told the deponent in essence: “I must burst now and die”, as she
then did pass away that very evening and was buried the day thereafter.

That another slave of the aforementioned De Wet, by the name of
Jacomijn, after having been at Vier en Twintig Rivieren at Johannes de
Waal, the brother-in-law of her owner, to suckle the child of De Waal,
again returned home on a certain Sunday during the recently passed month
of December. Among other things, some days thereafter she went out to
cut pig leaves,^[^10]^ leaving her sick child at home, and when this
work was done and she had come back, she pitifully abused this child
who, during the absence of its mother, had been doing nothing but
screaming, by beating it, so that even her husband, the slave David,
asked her why she was beating the child so much, adding: “One day you
will beat it to death”, and received as answer in essence: “It has
nothing to do with you!”

The deponent’s *baas*, who upon this noise had come from the *voorhuijs*
into the kitchen, gave with a back horse *sjambok* the aforementioned
Jacomijn two or three lashes over the arms while she was carrying the
child in her arms, whereupon the said slave hurriedly ran into the
*voorhuijs* and was followed by her owner, but that the deponent’s
mistress then intervened and pleaded on behalf of the same, so that she
did not receive any more lashes.

That the aforementioned Jacomijn that evening went to bed in an outside
room with her child, who was by then even more ill than before, and when
she again got up the following morning, and also when she came into the
*voorhuijs*, she did not say that her child had become any worse but, on
the contrary, upon the deponent’s question about how her child was, she
answered that it had slept well that night, although when this slave,
after about an hour had passed, again went to the aforesaid outside room
to fetch the child and bring it into the house, she found it lying dead
on the bed; without the deponent having been able to discover on the
body of that child anything but a small scratch on its forehead, which
the deponent supposes to have been caused by the fall which this
Jacomijn had with the child when she received the lashes from her said
owner.

There being nothing more to declare, the deponent asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of her statement as in the text, declaring
this to be the whole truth.

Thus recorded at the office of the secretary at Stellenbosch on 11
January 1792.

This mark X was put down by the *Bastaard-Hottentot* Anna with her own
hand.

As delegates, \[signed\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

In my presence, \[signed\] J.P. Faure, secretary.

TRANSLATION

There appears before the undersigned deputised *heemraden*, the
honourables Johan Bernhard Hoffman and Pieter Gerhard Wium, Fortuijn van
Bengalen, forty years old at a guess, bondsman of the *manhafte*
Francois de Wet, who, on the requisition of the landdrost here, the
honourable *koopman *Hendrik Lodewijk Bletterman, declares it to be
true:

That on a certain evening about three years ago, without being able to
determine the exact date, the deponent went from his work, which he had
done elsewhere on the fields that day, to the house and, when he entered
the kitchen, he saw with amazement that the slave of his said owner,
named Stijn, who was well and healthy when the deponent had left that
morning, was lying dead there in the kitchen, without the deponent being
able to say how or from what the same passed away, being only able to
discover from the remains that she had shortly before been vomiting a
lot. On that same evening this slave was taken, on the order of his said
owner, to an outside room by the deponent, his fellow slave David and
some other fellow slaves belonging to his owner, whose names the
deponent is unable to recollect because of the long duration and time,
and was buried in the morning of the following day.

That about fourteen days before the last New Year, when the slave
Jacomijn went out to collect so-called pig leaves, she left her suckling
child, who had returned home ill with her, shortly before this, from the
brother-in-law of the deponent’s owner, the *manhafte* Johannes de Waal,
with the other slave children in the kitchen; which child did nothing
but constantly scream. That when the said Jacomijn returned, she
chastised this child over this to such an extent that the aforesaid
David, with whom the said Jacomijn has a relationship, addressed her
with this question: “Why are you beating the child like that, you will
beat it to death one day”. That when the aforesaid owner of the
testifier \[*sic*\] came in upon this, he gave Jacomijn, who was
carrying her child in her arms, three lashes with an ordinary *sjambok*,
whereupon she ran inside to the *voorhuijs*. The day thereafter, while
busy slaughtering cattle, he understood from his other fellow slaves
that the child of Jacomijn was dead, without being able to say what had
been the cause of her death; while the corpse was buried that same day
by David and the deponent.

There being nothing more to declare, the deponent asserts to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, declaring
this to be the whole truth.

Thus recorded at the office of the secretary at Stellenbosch on 13
January 1792.

This cross X was put down by the slave Fortuijn with his own hand.

As delegates, \[signed\] J.B. Hoffman, P.G. Wium.

In my presence, \[signed\] J.P. Faure, secretary.

[^1]: * Infanticide was a form of resistance amongst slave women, since
    it deprived their owners of the benefit of new slave property,
    although its emotional and psychological effects on the women should
    not be forgotten. Venereal disease was widespread in the colony, not
    least because of its spread by sailors and soldiers aboard vessels
    visiting Table Bay. The authorities attempted, somewhat
    ineffectually, to control infanticide especially, for example
    *Kaapse Plakkaatboek* II: 171 (1740) and 246-47 (1753). See on this
    De Kock 1950: 184-86; Shell 1994: 312-14; and Van der Spuy 1993:
    152-98.*

[^2]:  The phrase between angled brackets was inserted above the line.

[^3]:  The phrase between angled brackets was added in the margin.

[^4]:  The figure of the date is unclear, but looks like 11 with 13
    written over it, or vice versa.

[^5]:  This may also be ‘13 Januarij’, see note 4 above.

[^6]:  For this practice, see 1788 David Malan Davidsz, n. 11.

[^7]:  This suggests an arrangement whereby the Khoi worker was
    contracted for a fixed period of time. It may be that this person
    was in fact a *Bastaard-Hottentot, *who was indentured until the age
    of twenty-five after 1775 (see 1752 April van de Caab n. 1). But
    there was no fixed system for Khoi labourers, and possibly this was
    a specific arrangement for this case.

[^8]:  David was setting out to complain to the landdrost. It appears
    from this that Jacobus du Toit did not force him to return, but
    rather attempted to persuade him to do so by less forceful means. It
    is also notable that Du Toit was De Wet’s brother-in-law. Exposure
    to the authorities in this way would have brought shame and
    dishonour, not only on the slaveowner (who was a former burgher
    lieutenant with the title *manhaften*, and would have had some
    standing in the community), but also on his relations. On honour and
    its operation in the Stellenbosch slave-owning community, see
    Dooling 1992 and 1994.

[^9]:  In this case it was probably produced by mixing water and ash.

[^10]:  That is, South African arum lilies, still called *varkore* or
    *varkblomme* in Afrikaans.
