1.  ABRAHAM VAN MACASSAR

*This case of conflict between a slave and his owners, leading to arson,
was provoked by the demand that Abraham van Macassar[^1] should
acknowledge and greet his owner after returning from a day’s work.
Clearly there was more behind Abraham’s discontent and an apparently
minor demand such as this may have been the final straw.[^2]
Abraham was captured and executed immediately in Stellenbosch.*[^3]

**CJ 449** Criminele Process Stukken, 1792-1794, ff. 419-21.

Relaas gegeeven, ten overstaan van de ondergeteekende gecommitteerde
heemraaden, d’ edele Pieter Gerard Wium en Christman Joël Ackerman, en
ter requisitie van den landdrost alhier, de heer Hendrik Lodewijk
Bletterman, door ende van weegens den burger Dirk Hoffman, van
competenten ouderdom, luijdende hetzelve als volgt:

Dat den relatant, die woonagtig is bij deszelfs vader, den luitenant der
burgerij, Matthiam Hoffman, op gistere avond, de klokke omtrent half
neegen, de lijffeigen van deszelvs voormelde vader, in name Abraham, t’
huijs gekomen zijnde, en dien dag gewerkt hebbende bij den diacon, sieur
Jacobus Roux, door deszelfs vader was gevraagd of hij Abraham geen Goede
Avond zegge konde wanneer hij te huijs kwam, door gemelde Abraham in
substantie was geantwoord: Als ik over dag mijn werk doe, en ’s avonds
thuijs kom, dat is genoeg; waarop des relatants vader meergemelde
Abraham eenige vuijstslagen gegeeven hebbende, voorseijde Abraham tegens
deszelfs vader gezegd had: Waarom slaat gij mij?, en zich daarop naar ’t
slavenhuijs begeeven hebbende en terstond wederom gekoomen zijnde in de
combuijs, door des relatants vader aan gemelde Abraham was gevraagd: Wat
maakt gij daar?, door meergemelde Abraham werd geantwoord: Ik zoek
vuur!, en vervolgens weederom bij herhaling aan des relatants vader had
gevraagd: Waarom heb jij mijn \[*sic*\] geslagen?, des relatants vader
hierop met een queepeeren lat de voorseijde Abraham eenige slagen had
toegebracht, waarop door gemelde Abraham aan des relatants vader bij
herhaling gezegt zijnde: Schij uijt, Schij uijt; des relatants broeder,
in name Jesais \[sic\], merkende dat meergemelde Abraham een mes
tusschen dezelfs baaijtje en hemb verborgen had, denzelve Abraham met de
linkerhand had aangegreepen en met de rechter hand ’t mes trachte magtig
te worden, voorseijde Abraham zich had losgerukt, en de relatant de
binnen combuijsdeur digt gemaakt; vervolgens zijn pistool geladen,
terwijl des relatants vader zig van een sabel voorzien, en des relatants
broeder zijn snaphaan had geladen.

Dat de relatant, beneevens zijn ouders en broeder, niets verneemende,
zicht ter ruste begeeven hadden; omtrent elf uuren gewekt wierden door
een gerucht alsof het huijs in brand was, en alstoen opstaande ontwaard
was geworden, dat ’t huis in de brand stond; waarop de relatant naar
buijten geloopen zijnde tot onder de, voor het huijs staande, boomen,
meergemelde Abraham, zo den relatant toescheen, uijt ’t jongenshuijs
naas den relatant was koomen gelopen met een mes in de hand en, zodra
den relatant hem Abraham verkende, had den relatant hem Abraham
gevraagt: Waarom wilt gij mij steeken?, voormelde Abraham den relatant
had toegevoegt: Dat zal ik jou wel wijzen!, en vervolgens aan den
relatant een steek op den linkerarm had toegebracht, waarop de relatant
zich gequetst voelende, zich in aller ijle heeft begeeven naar ’t huijs
van den oud heemraad, de edele Christman Joël Ackerman.

Niets meer relateerende, geevt den relatant voor reedenen van
weetenschap als in den text, berijd zijnde ’tzelve met eede te
bevestigen.

Aldus gerelateerd op de hofsteede Welgevalle, geleegen over de Eerste
Rivier bij Stellenbosch, den 24^e^ Januarij 1794, ten overstaan van den,
in den hoofde gemelde gecommitteerde heemraden, die de minute deezes,
beneevens den relatant en mij, secretaris behoorlijk hebbe onderteekend.

’Twelk ik getuijge, \[get.\] J. Wege, secretaris.

TRANSLATION

Statement, given in the presence of the undersigned deputised
*heemraden*, the honourables Pieter Gerard Wium and Christman Joël
Ackerman, on the requisition of the landdrost here, the honourable
Hendrik Lodewijk Bletterman, by the burgher Dirk Hoffman, of competent
age, which goes as follows:

That the testifier, who lives with his father, the lieutenant of the
burgher militia, Matthiam Hoffman, \[witnessed the following:\][^4]
last night, the time being about half past eight, the bondsman of his
father, by the name of Abraham, came home, having worked that day at the
deacon, *Sieur* Jacobus Roux,[^5] and was asked by his father why he,
Abraham, could not say “Good evening” when he got home, who in essence
answered him: “If I do my work during the day and come home in the
evening, that is enough”, upon which his father dealt the aforementioned
Abraham some blows with his fist. The aforesaid Abraham asked his
father: “Why do you hit me?”, and then repaired to the slave house, but
returned almost at once to the kitchen. When the said Abraham was asked
by the father of the testifier: “What are you doing here?”, and was
answered by the aforementioned Abraham: “I want fire!”,[^6] who then
again repeated his question to the father of the testifier: “Why did you
hit me?” Hereupon his father gave the aforesaid Abraham some strokes
with a cane of quince, during which the aforesaid Abraham repeatedly
said to the father of the testifier: “Stop it, Stop it”. The testifier’s
brother, by the name of Jesais[^7], noticing that the aforementioned
Abraham had hidden a knife between his jacket and shirt, grabbed Abraham
with his left hand and, with his right hand, tried to get possession of
the knife. The aforesaid Abraham pulled himself loose, while the
testifier closed the inside door of the kitchen, then loaded his pistol,
while his father provided himself with a sabre and his brother loaded
his musket.

That since the testifier, as also his parents and brother, did not hear
anything, they went to bed, but they were awoken at about 11 o’clock by
a noise as if the house was on fire and, when getting up, noticed that
the house was on fire; whereupon the testifier ran to the outside as far
as the trees standing before the house. The aforementioned Abraham, so
it seemed to the testifier, came running from the slave house up to him
with a knife in his hand and, as soon as the testifier had recognised
Abraham, he asked him: “Why do you want to stab me?”, to which the
aforesaid Abraham said: “I will show you that!” and thereupon stabbed
the testifier in his left arm; whereupon the testifier, feeling himself
wounded, proceeded in all haste to the house of the former *heemraad*,
the honourable Christman Joël Ackerman.

There being nothing more to relate, the testifier declares to be
convinced of the accuracy of his statement as in the text, being willing
to confirm the same with oaths.

Thus related at the residence Welgevallen, situated across the Eerste
River at Stellenbosch, on 24 January 1794, in the presence of the
deputised *heemraden* mentioned in the heading, who have signed the
original of this, together with the testifier and me, the secretary.

Which I declare, \[signed\] J. Wege, secretary.

[^1]: * Abraham is referred to as ‘van Macassar’ in the report of the
    Stellenbosch landdrost, CJ 449, f. 395, but as ‘van Madagascar’ in
    the report of Abraham’s cross-examination and in the *regtstrollen*
    of the Council of Justice, CJ 449, f. 423 and CJ 76, f. 74. This was
    doubtless a transcription error, but it does indicate how slave
    toponyms could be readily confused. *

[^2]: * Compare with the demand made for verbal greeting in 1792 Mentor
    van Mosambique. *

[^3]: * Abraham was wounded on his recapture and the surgeon reported
    that he was unlikely to live much longer. He confessed to causing
    the fire, in order to force his owner out of the house and to kill
    him. Taking precedent from a case in 1728 (the details of which were
    forwarded to the Council of Justice), the Stellenbosch landdrost
    then decided to have Abraham immediately executed outside the
    Stellenbosch prison, CJ 449, ff. 395-96 and CJ 76, f. 74. For this
    principle of *periculum in mora*, see 1760 Achilles van de West
    Cust, n. 12. Other records sent to the Council of Justice included
    the testimonies of Matthiam Hoffman, Josias Hoffman, a surgeon’s
    report on Abraham’s wounds and a record of his cross-examination, CJ
    449, ff. 397-435. *

[^4]:  The original contains no main verb of which ‘the testifier’ could
    be the subject, but presumably something like that supplied is
    meant.

[^5]:  Abraham was a bricklayer or mason, according to the testimony of
    Matthiam Hoffman, and had presumably been lent or hired out for the
    day. Hoffman also added the detail that he came back to his owner’s
    farm, but had failed to report his presence to his owner, CJ 449, f.
    405. For slave hiring, see 1776 Julij van Timor, n. 2.

[^6]:  For his tobacco pipe, according to the testimony of Matthiam
    Hofman, CJ 449, f. 406.

[^7]:  *Sic*. The brother’s name was Josias.
